A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

A Moveable Feast

Ernest
Hemingway

 

If you are lucky enough to have lived in
Paris as a young man, then wherever you go for the rest of your life, it stays
with you, for Paris is a moveable feast. 

 

—Ernest
Hemingway

To
a friend, 1950

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

Preface

 

 

            For
reasons sufficient to the writer, many places, people, observations and
impressions have been left out of this book. Some were secrets and some were
known by everyone and everyone has written about them and will doubtless write
more. 

            There
is no mention of the Stade Anastasie where the boxers served as waiters at the
tables set out under the trees and the ring was in the garden. Nor of training
with Larry Gains, nor the great twenty-round fights at the cirque d'hiver. Nor
of such good friends as Charlie Sweeny, Bill Bird and Mike Strater, nor of
Andre Masson and Miro. 

            There
is no mention of our voyages to the black forest or of our one-day explorations
of the forests that we loved around Paris. It would be fine if all these were
in this book but we will have to do without them for now. 

            If
the reader prefers, this book may be regarded as fiction. But there is always
the chance that such a book of fiction may throw some light on what has been
written as fact. 

 

ERNEST
HEMINGWAY

San
Francisco de Paula, Cuba 1960

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–1–

A
Good Café on the Place St.-Michel

 

 

            Then
there was the bad weather. It would come in one day when the fall was over. We
would have to shut the windows in the night against the rain and the cold wind
would strip the leaves from the trees in the Place Contrescarpe. The leaves lay
sodden in the rain and the wind drove the rain against the big green autobus at
the terminal and the cafe des amateurs was crowded and the windows misted over
from the heat and the smoke inside. It was a sad, evilly run cafe where the
drunkards of the quarter crowded together and i kept away from it because of
the smell of dirty bodies and the sour smell of drunkenness. the men and women
who frequented the amateurs stayed drunk all of the time, or all of the time
they could afford it, mostly on wine which they bought by the half-litre or
litre. Many strangely named aperitifs were advertised, but few people could
afford them except as a foundation to build their wine drunks on. The women
drunkards were called poivrottes, which meant female rummies. 

            The
cafe des amateurs was the cesspool of the rue mouffetard, that wonderful narrow
crowded market street which led into the place contrescarpe. The squat toilets
of the old apartment houses, one by the side of the stairs on each floor with
the two cleated cement shoe-shaped elevations on each side of the aperture so a
locataire would not slip, emptied into cesspools which were emptied by
pumping into horse-drawn tank wagons at night. in the summer time, with all
windows open, we would hear the pumping and the odour was very strong. the tank
wagons were painted brown and saffron colour and in the moonlight when they
worked the rue cardinal lemoine their wheeled, horse-drawn cylinders looked
like braque paintings. no one emptied the cafe des amateurs though, and its
yellowed poster stating the terms and penalties of the law against public
drunkenness was as flyblown and disregarded as its clients were constant and
ill-smelling. 

            All
of the sadness of the city came suddenly with the first cold rains of winter,
and there were no more tops to the high white houses as you walked but only the
wet blackness of the street and the closed doors of the small shops, the herb
sellers, the stationery and the newspaper shops, the midwife - second class -
and the hotel where verlaine had died, where i had a room on the top floor
where i worked. 

            It
was either six or eight flights up to the top floor and it was very cold and i
knew how much it would cost for a bundle of small twigs, three wire-wrapped
packets of short, half-pencil length pieces of split pine to catch fire from
the twigs, and then the bundle of half-dried lengths of hard wood that i must
buy to make a fire that would warm the room. so i went to the far side of the
street to look up at the roof in the rain and see if any chimneys were going,
and how the smoke blew. there was no smoke and i thought about how the chimney
would be cold and might not draw and of the room possibly filling with smoke,
and the fuel wasted, and the money gone with it, and i walked on in the rain. i
walked down past the lycee henri quatre and the ancient church of
st-etienne-du-mont and the windswept place du pantheon and cut in for shelter
to the right and finally came out on the lee side of the boulevard st-michel
and worked on down it past the cluny and the boulevard st-germain until i came
to a good cafe that i knew on the place st-michel. 

            It
was a pleasant cafe, warm and clean and friendly, and i hung up my old
waterproof on the coat rack to dry and put my worn and weathered felt hat on
the rack above the bench and ordered a cafe au lait.  the waiter brought it and i took out a
notebook from the pocket of the coat and a pencil and started to write. i was
writing about up in michigan and since it was a wild, cold, blowing day it was
that sort of day in the story. i had already seen the end of fall come through
boyhood, youth and young manhood, and in one place you could write about it
better than in another. that was called transplanting yourself, i thought, and
it could be as necessary with people as with other sorts of growing things. but
in the story the boys were drinking and this made me thirsty and i ordered a
rum st james. this tasted wonderful on the cold day and i kept on writing,
feeling very well and feeling the good martinique rum warm me all through my
body and my spirit. 

            A
girl came in the cafe and sat by herself at a table near the window. she was
very pretty with a face fresh as a newly minted coin if they minted coins in
smooth flesh with rain-freshened skin, and her hair was black as a crow's wing
and cut sharply and diagonally across her cheek. 

            I
looked at her and she disturbed me and made me very excited. i wished i could
put her in the story, or anywhere, but she had placed herself so she could
watch the street and the entry and i knew she was waiting for someone. so i
went on writing. 

            The
story was writing itself and i was having a hard time keeping up with it. i
ordered another rum st james and i watched the girl whenever i looked up, or
when i sharpened the pencil with a pencil sharpener with the shavings curling
into the saucer under my drink. 

            I've
seen you, beauty, and you belong to me now, whoever you are waiting for and if
i never see you again, i thought. you belong to me and all paris belongs to me
and i belong to this notebook and this pencil. 

            Then
i went back to writing and i entered far into the story and was lost in it. i
was writing it now and it was not writing itself and i did not look up nor know
anything about the time nor think where i was nor order any more rum st james.
i was tired of rum st james without thinking about it. then the story was
finished and i was very tired. i read the last paragraph and then i looked up
and looked for the girl and she had gone. i hope she's gone with a good man, i
thought. but i felt sad. 

            I
closed up the story in the notebook and put it in my inside pocket and i asked
the waiter for a dozen portugaises  and a half-carafe of the dry white wine they
had there. 

            After
writing a story i was always empty and both sad and happy, as though i had made
love, and i was sure this was a very good story although i would not know truly
how good until i read it over the next day. 

            As
i ate the oysters with their strong taste of the sea and their faint metallic
taste that the cold white wine washed away, leaving only the sea taste and the
succulent texture, and as i drank their cold liquid from each shell and washed
it down with the crisp taste of the wine, i lost the empty feeling and began to
be happy and to make plans. 

            Now
that the bad weather had come, we could leave paris for a while for a place
where this rain would be snow coming down through the pines and covering the
road and the high hillsides and at an altitude where we would hear it creak as
we walked home at night. below les avants there was a chalet where the pension
was wonderful and where we would be together and have our books and at night be
warm in bed together with the windows open and the stars bright. that was where
we could go. 

            Travelling
third class on the train was not expensive. the pension cost very little more
than we spent in paris. 

            I
would give up the room in the hotel where i wrote and there was only the rent
of 74 rue cardinal lemoine which was nominal. i had written journalism for
toronto and the cheques for that were due. i could write that anywhere under
any circumstances and we had money to make the trip. 

            Maybe
away from paris i could write about paris as in paris i could write about
michigan. i did not know it was too early for that because i did not know paris
well enough. but that was how it worked out eventually. anyway we would go if
my wife wanted to, and i finished the oysters and the wine and paid my score in
the cafe and made it the shortest way back up the montagne ste-genevieve
through the rain, that was now only local weather and not something that
changed your life, to the flat at the top of the hill. 

            'I
think it would be wonderful, tatie,' my wife said. she had a gently modelled
face and her eyes and her smile lighted up at decisions as though they were
rich presents. 

            'When
should we leave?' 

            'Whenever
you want.' 

            'Oh,
i want to right away. didn't you know?' 

            'Maybe
it will be fine and clear when we come back. it can be very fine when it is
clear and cold.' 

            'I'm
sure it will be,' she said. 'weren't you good to think of going, too.'

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–2–

Miss Stein Instructs

 

 

            When
we came back to paris it was clear and cold and lovely. the city had
accommodated itself to winter, there was good wood for sale at the wood and
coal place across our street, and there were braziers outside of many of the
good cafes so that you could keep warm on the terraces. our own apartment was
warm and cheerful. 

            We
burned boulets  which were
moulded, egg-shaped lumps of coal dust, on the wood fire, and on the streets
the winter light was beautiful. now you were accustomed to see the bare trees
against the sky and you walked on the fresh-washed gravel paths through the
luxembourg gardens in the clear sharp wind. the trees were sculpture without
their leaves when you were reconciled to them, and the winter winds blew across
the surfaces of the ponds and the fountains blew in the bright light. all the
distances were short now since we had been in the mountains. 

            Because
of the change in altitude i did not notice the grade of the hills except with
pleasure, and the climb up to the top floor of the hotel where i worked, in a
room that looked across all the roofs and the chimneys of the high hill of the
quarter, was a pleasure. the fireplace drew well in the room and it was warm
and pleasant to work. i brought mandarines and roasted chestnuts to the room in
paper packets and peeled and ate the small tangerine-like oranges and threw
their skins and spat their seeds in the fire when i ate them and the roasted
chestnuts when i was hungry. i was always hungry with the walking and the cold
and the working. up in the room i had a bottle of kirsch that we had brought
back from the mountains and i took a drink of kirsch when i would get towards
the end of a story or towards the end of the day's work. when i was through
working for the day i put away the notebook, or the paper, in the drawer of the
table and put any mandarines that were left in my pocket. they would freeze if
they were left in the room at night. 

            It
was wonderful to walk down the long flights of stairs knowing that i'd had good
luck working. i always worked until i had something done and i always stopped
when i knew what was going to happen next. that way i could be sure of going on
the next day. but sometimes when i was starting a new story and i could not get
it going, i would sit in front of the fire and squeeze the peel of the little
oranges into the edge of the flame and watch the sputter of blue that they
made. i would stand and look out over the roofs of paris and think, 'do not
worry. you have always written before and you will write now. all you have to
do is write one true sentence. write the truest sentence that you know.' so
finally i would write one true sentence, and then go on from there. it was easy
then because there was always one true sentence that i knew or had seen or had
heard someone say. if i started to write elaborately, or like someone
introducing or presenting something, i found that i could cut that scrollwork
or ornament out and throw it away and start with the first true simple
declarative sentence i had written. up in that room i decided that i would
write one story about each thing that i knew about. i was trying to do this all
the time i was writing, and it was good and severe discipline. 

            it
was in that room too that i learned not to think about anything that i was
writing from the time i stopped writing until i started again the next day.
that way my subconscious would be working on it and at the same time i would be
listening to other people and noticing everything, i hoped; learning, i hoped;
and i would read so that i would not think about my work and make myself
impotent to do it. going down the stairs when i had worked well, and that needed
luck as well as discipline, was a wonderful feeling and i was free then to walk
anywhere in paris. 

            if
i walked down by different streets to the jardin du luxembourg in the afternoon
i could walk through the gardens and then go to the musee du luxembourg where
the great paintings were that have now mostly been transferred to the louvre
and the jeu de paume. i went there nearly every day for the cezannes and to see
the manets and the monets and the other impressionists that i had first come to
know about in the art institute at chicago. i was learning something from the
painting of cezanne that made writing simple true sentences far from enough to
make the stories have the dimensions that i was trying to put in them. i was
learning very much from him but i was not articulate enough to explain it to
anyone. besides, it was a secret. but if the light was gone in the luxembourg i
would walk up through the gardens and stop in at the studio apartment where
gertrude stein lived at 27 rue de fleurus. 

            my
wife and i had called on miss stein, and she and the friend who lived with her
had been very cordial and friendly and we had loved the big studio with the
great paintings. it was like one of the best rooms in the finest museum except
there was a big fireplace and it was warm and comfortable and they gave you
good things to eat and tea and natural distilled liqueurs made from purple
plums, yellow plums or wild raspberries. these were fragrant, colourless
alcohols served from cut-glass carafes in small glasses and whether they were quetsche,
mirabelle  or framboise  they all tasted like the fruits they came
from, converted into a controlled fire on your tongue that warmed you and
loosened it. 

            Miss
Stein was very big but not tall and was heavily built like a peasant woman. 

            She
had beautiful eyes and a strong German-Jewish face that also could have been
friulano and she reminded me of a northern Italian peasant woman with her
clothes, her mobile face and her lovely, thick, alive immigrant hair which she
wore put up in the same way she had probably worn it in college. she talked all
the time and at first it was about people and places. 

            Her
companion had a very pleasant voice, was small, very dark, with her hair cut
like joan of arc in the boutet de monvel illustrations and had a very hooked
nose. She was working on a piece of needlepoint when we first met them and she
worked on this and saw to the food and drink and talked to my wife. She made
one conversation and listened to two and often interrupted the one she was not
making. Afterwards she explained to me that she always talked to the wives. the
wives, my wife and i felt, were tolerated. but we liked miss stein and her
friend, although the friend was frightening. 

            the
paintings and the cakes and the eau-de-vie  were truly wonderful. they seemed to like us
too and treated us as though we were very good, well-mannered and promising
children and i felt that they forgave us for being in love and being married -
time would fix that - and when my wife invited them to tea, they accepted. 

            when
they came to our flat they seemed to like us even more; but perhaps that was
because the place was so small and we were much closer together. miss stein sat
on the bed that was on the floor and asked to see the stories i had written and
she said that she liked them except one called up in michigan. 

            'it's
good,' she said. 'that's not the question at all. but it is inaccrochable.  that means it is like a picture that a painter
paints and then he cannot hang it when he has a show and nobody will buy it
because they cannot hang it either.' 

            'but
what if it is not dirty but it is only that you are trying to use words that
people would actually use? that are the only words that can make the story come
true and that you must use them? you have to use them.' 

            'but
you don't get the point at all,' she said. 'you mustn't write anything that is inaccrochable.
 there is no point in it. it's wrong
and it's silly.' 

            she
herself wanted to be published in the atlantic monthly,  she told me, and she would be. she told me
that i was not a good enough writer to be published there or in the saturday
evening post  but that i might be
some new sort of writer in my own way, but the first thing to remember was not
to write stories that were inaccrochable.  i did not argue about this nor try to explain
again what i was trying to do about conversation. that was my own business and
it was much more interesting to listen. 

            that
afternoon she told us, too, how to buy pictures. 

            'you
can either buy clothes or buy pictures,' she said. 'it's that simple. no one
who is not very rich can do both. pay no attention to your clothes and no
attention at all to the mode, and buy your clothes for comfort and durability,
and you will have the clothes money to buy pictures.' 

            'but
even if i never bought any more clothing ever,' i said, 'i wouldn't have enough
money to buy the picassos that i want.' 

            'No.
he's out of your range. you have to buy the people of your own age - of your
own military service group. you'll know them. you'll meet them around the
quarter. 

            There
are always good new serious painters. but it's not you buying clothes so much. 

            It's
your wife always. it's women's clothes that are expensive.' 

            I
saw my wife trying not to look at the strange, steerage clothes that miss stein
wore and she was successful. when they left we were still popular, i thought,
and we were asked to come again to 27 rue de fleurus. 

            It
was later on that i was asked to come to the studio any time after five in the winter
time. i had met miss stein in the luxembourg. i cannot remember whether she was
walking her dog or not, nor whether she had a dog then. i know that i was
walking myself, since we could not afford a dog nor even a cat then, and the
only cats i knew were in the cafes or small restaurants or the great cats that
i admired in concierges' 

            Windows.
later i often met miss stein with her dog in the luxembourg gardens; but i
think this time was before she had one. 

            But
i accepted her invitation, dog or no dog, and had taken to stopping in at the
studio, and she always gave me the natural eau-de-vie, insisting on my
refilling my glass, and i looked at the pictures and we talked. the pictures
were exciting and the talk was very good. she talked, mostly, and she told me
about modern pictures and about painters - more about them as people than as
painters - and she talked about her work. she showed me the many volumes of
manuscript (chat she had written and that her companion typed each day. writing
every day made her happy, but as i got to know her better i found that for her
to keep happy it was necessary that this steady daily output, which varied with
her energy, be published and that she receive recognition. 

            This
had not become an acute situation when i first knew her, since she had
published three stories that were intelligible to anyone. one of these stories,
melanctha, was very good, and good samples of her experimental writing
had been published in book form and had been well praised by critics who had
met her or known her. she had such a personality that when she wished to win
anyone over to her side she would not be resisted, and critics who met her and
saw her pictures took on trust writing of hers that they could not understand
because of their enthusiasm for her as a person, and because of their
confidence in her judgment. she had also discovered many truths about rhythms
and the uses of words in repetition that were valid and valuable and she talked
well about them. 

            but
she disliked the drudgery of revision and the obligation to make her writing
intelligible, although she needed to have publication and official acceptance,
especially for the unbelievably long book called the making of americans. 

            this
book began magnificently, went on very well for a long way with great stretches
of great brilliance and then went on endlessly in repetitions that a more
conscientious and less lazy writer would have put in the waste basket. i came
to know it very well as i got - forced, perhaps, would be the word -ford madox
ford to publish it in the transatlantic review  serially, knowing that it would outrun the
life of the review. 

            for
publication in the review i had to read all of miss stein's proof for her as
this was a work which gave her no happiness. 

            on
this cold afternoon when i had come past the concierge's lodge and the cold
courtyard to the warmth of the studio, all that was years ahead. on this day
miss stein was instructing me about sex. by that time we liked each other very
much and i had already learned that everything i did not understand probably
had something to it. 

            miss
stein thought that i was too uneducated about sex and i must admit that i had
certain prejudices against homosexuality since i knew its more primitive
aspects. i knew it was why you carried a knife and would use it when you were
in the company of tramps when you were a boy in the days when wolves was not a
slang term for men obsessed by the pursuit of women. i knew many inaccrochable
terms and phrases from kansas city days and the mores of different parts of
that city, chicago and the lake boats. under questioning i tried to tell miss
stein that when you were a boy and moved in the company of men, you had to be
prepared to kill a man, know how to do it and really know that you would do it
in order not to be interfered with. that term was accrochable. if you
knew you would kill, other people sensed it very quickly and you were let
alone; but there were certain situations you could not allow yourself to be
forced into or trapped into. i could have expressed myself more vividly by
using an inaccrochable phrase that wolves used on the lake boats, 'oh
gash may be fine but one eye for mine.' but i was always careful of my language
with miss stein even when true phrases might have clarified or better expressed
a prejudice. 

            'Yes,
yes, Hemingway,' she said. 'but you were living in a milieu of criminals and
perverts.' 

            I
did not want to argue that, although i thought that i had lived in a world as
it was and there were all kinds of people in it and i tried to understand them,
although some of them i could not like and some i still hated. 

            'But
what about the old man with beautiful manners and a great name who came to the
hospital in italy and brought me a bottle of marsala or campari and behaved
perfectly, and then one day i would have to tell the nurse never to let that
man into the room again?' i asked. 

            'Those
people are sick and cannot help themselves and you should pity them.' 

            'Should
i pity so and so?' i asked. i gave his name but he delights so in giving it
himself that i feel there is no need to give it for him. 

            'No.
he's vicious. he's a corrupter and he's truly vicious.' 'but he's supposed to
be a good writer.' 'he's not,' she said. 'he's just a showman and he corrupts
for the pleasure of corruption and he leads people into other vicious practices
as well. drugs, for example.' 

            'and
in milan the man i'm to pity was not trying to corrupt me?' 

            'don't
be silly. how could he hope to corrupt you? do you corrupt a boy like you, who
drinks alcohol, with a bottle of marsala? no, he was a pitiful old man who
could not help what he was doing. he was sick and he could not help it and you
should pity him.' 

            'i
did at the time,' i said. 'but i was disappointed because he had such beautiful
manners.' 

            i
took another sip of the eau-de-vie  and pitied the old man and looked at picasso's
nude of the girl with the basket of flowers. i had not started the conversation
and thought it had become a little dangerous. there were almost never any
pauses in a conversation with miss stein, but we had paused and there was
something she wanted to tell me and i filled my glass. 

            'you
know nothing about any of this really, hemingway,' she said. 'you've met known
criminals and sick people and vicious people. the main thing is that the act
male homosexuals commit is ugly and repugnant and afterwards they are disgusted
with themselves. they drink and take drugs, to palliate this, but they are
disgusted with the act and they are always changing partners and cannot be
really happy.' 

            'i
see.' 

            'in
women it is the opposite. they do nothing that they are disgusted by and
nothing that is repulsive and afterwards they are happy and they can lead happy
lives together.' 

            'i
see,' i said. 'but what about so and so?' 

            'she's
vicious,' miss stein said. 'she's truly vicious, so she can never be happy
except with new people. she corrupts people.' 

            'I
understand.' 

            'You’re
sure you understand?' 

            There
were so many things to understand in those days and i was glad when we talked
about something else. the park was closed so i had to walk down along it to the
rue de vaugirard and around the lower end of the park. it was sad when the park
was closed and locked and i was sad walking around it instead of through it and
in a hurry to get home to the rue cardinal lemoine. the day had started out so
brightly too. i would have to work hard tomorrow. work could cure almost
anything, i believed then, and i believe now. then all i had to be cured of, i
decided miss stein felt, was youth and loving my wife. i was not at all sad
when i got home to the rue cardinal lemoine and told my newly acquired
knowledge to my wife. in the night we were happy with our own knowledge we
already had and other new knowledge we had acquired in the mountains.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–3–

“Une
Génération Perdue”

 

 

            It
was easy to get into the habit of stopping in at 27 rue de fleurus late in the
afternoon for the warmth and the great pictures and the conversation. often
miss stein would have no guests and she was always very friendly and for a long
time she was affectionate. when i had come back from trips that i had made to
the different political conferences or to the near east or germany for the
canadian paper and the news services that i worked for she wanted me to tell
her about all the amusing details. 

            There
were funny parts always and she liked them and also what the germans call
gallows-humour stories. she wanted to know the gay part of how the world was
going; never the real, never the bad. 

            I
was young and not gloomy and there were always strange and comic things that
happened in the worst time and miss stein liked to hear these. the other things
i did not talk of and wrote by myself. 

            When
i had not come back from any trips and would stop in at the rue de fleurus
after working i would try sometimes to get miss stein to talk about books. when
i was writing, it was necessary for me to read after i had written. if you kept
thinking about it, you would lose the thing that you were writing before you
could go on with it the next day. it was necessary to get exercise, to be tired
in the body, and it was very good to make love with whom you loved. that was
better than anything. but afterwards, when you were empty, it was necessary to
read in order not to think or worry about your work until you could do it
again. i had learned already never to empty the well of my writing, but always
stop when there was still something there in the deep part of the well, and let
it refill at night from the springs that fed it. 

            To
keep my mind off writing sometimes after i had worked i would read writers who
were writing then, such as Aldous Huxley, D.H. Lawrence or any who had books
published that i could get from sylvia beach's library or find along the quais.

            'Huxley
is a dead man,' miss stein said. 'why do you want to read a dead man? 

            Can't
you see he is dead?' 

            I
could not see, then, that he was a dead man and i said that his books amused me
and kept me from thinking. 

            'You
should only read what is truly good or what is frankly bad.' 

            'I've
been reading truly good books all winter and all last winter and i'll read them
next winter, and i don't like frankly bad books.' 

            'Why
do you read this trash? it is inflated trash, hemingway. by a dead man.' 

            'I
like to see what they are writing,' i said. 'and it keeps my mind off me doing
it.' 

            'Who
else do you read now?' 

            'D.H.
Lawrence,' i said. 'he wrote some very good short stories, one called the
prussian officer'. 

            'I
tried to read his novels. he's impossible. he's pathetic and preposterous. he
writes like a sick man.' 

            'I
liked sons and lovers  and the
white peacock' I said. 'maybe that not so well. i couldn't read women in
love.' 

            'If
you don't want to read what is bad, and want to read something that will hold
your interest and is marvellous in its own way, you should read marie belloc
lowndes.' 

            I
had never heard of her, and miss stein loaned me the lodger,  that marvellous story of jack the ripper and
another book about murder at a place outside paris that could only be enghien-les-bains.
they were both splendid after-work books, the people credible and the action
and the terror never false. they were perfect for reading after you had worked
and i read all the mrs belloc lowndes that there was. but there was only so
much and none as good as the first two and i never found anything as good for
that empty time of day or night until the first fine simenon books came out. 

            I
think miss stein would have liked the good simenons - the first one i read was
either l'ecluse nume'ro i,  or la
maison du canal -  but i am not sure
because when i knew miss stein she did not like to read french although she
loved to speak it. janet planner gave me the first two simenons i ever read.
she loved to read french and she had read simenon when he was a crime reporter.

            In
the three or four years that we were good friends i cannot remember gertrude
stein ever speaking well of any writer who had not written favourably about her
work or done something to advance her career except for ronald firbank and,
later, scott fitzgerald. when i first met her she did not speak of sherwood
anderson as a writer but spoke glowingly of him as a man and of his great,
beautiful, warm italian eyes and of his kindness and his charm. i did not care
about his great beautiful warm italian eyes but i liked some of his short
stories very much. they were simply written and sometimes beautifully written
and he knew the people he was writing about and cared deeply for them. miss
stein did not want to talk about his stories but always about him as a person. 

            'What
about his novels?' i asked her. she did not want to talk about anderson's works
any more than she would talk about joyce. if you brought up joyce twice, you
would not be invited back. it was like mentioning one general favourably to
another general. you learned not to do it the first time you made the mistake.
you could always mention a general, though, that the general you were talking
to had beaten. the general you were talking to would praise the beaten general
greatly and go happily into detail on how he had beaten him. 

            Anderson's
stories were too good to make happy conversation. i was prepared to tell miss
stein how strangely poor his novels were, but this would have been bad too
because it was criticizing one of her most loyal supporters. when he wrote a
novel finally called dark laughter,  so terribly bad, silly and affected that i
could not keep from criticizing it in a parody,* miss stein was very angry. i
had attacked someone that was a part of her apparatus. but for a long time
before that she was not angry. she, herself, began to praise sherwood lavishly
after he had cracked up as a writer. [* the torrents of spring.] 

            She
was angry at ezra pound because he had sat down too quickly on a small, fragile
and, doubtless, uncomfortable chair, that it is quite possible he had been
given on purpose, and had either cracked or broken it. that he was a great poet
and a gentle and generous man and could have accommodated himself in a
normal-size chair was not considered. the reasons for her dislike of ezra,
skilfully and maliciously put, were invented years later. 

            It
was when we had come back from canada and were living in the rue
notre-dame-des-champs and miss stein and i were still good friends that miss
stein made the remark about the lost generation. she had some ignition trouble
with the old model t ford she then drove and the young man who worked in the
garage and had served in the last year of the war had not been adept, or
perhaps had not broken the priority of other vehicles, in repairing miss
stein's ford. anyway he had not been serieux and had been corrected
severely by the patron  of the
garage after miss stein's protest. the patron had said to him, 'you are
all a generation perdue.' 

            'That's
what you are. that's what you all are,' miss stein said. 'all of you young
people who served in the war. you are a lost generation.' 

            'Really?'
i said. 

            'You
are,' she insisted. 'you have no respect for anything. you drink yourselves to
death...' 

            'Was
the young mechanic drunk?' i asked. 

            'Of
course not.' 

            'Have
you ever seen me drunk?' 

            'No.
but your friends are drunk.' 

            'I've
been drunk,' i said. 'but i don't come here drunk.' 

            'Of
course not. i didn't say that.' 

            'The
boy's patron  was probably drunk
by eleven o'clock in the morning,' i said. 

            'That's
why he makes such lovely phrases.' 

            'Don't
argue with me, hemingway,' miss stein said. 'it does no good at all. you're all
a lost generation, exactly as the garage keeper said.' 

            Later
when i wrote my first novel i tried to balance miss stein's quotation from the
garage keeper with one from ecclesiastes. but that night walking home i thought
about the boy in the garage and if he had ever been hauled in one of those
vehicles when they were converted to ambulances. i remembered how they used to
burn out their brakes going down the mountain roads with a full load of wounded
and braking in low and finally using the reverse, and how the last ones were
driven over the mountainside empty, so they could be replaced by big fiats with
a good h-shift and metal-to-metal brakes. i thought of miss stein and sherwood
anderson and egotism and mental laziness versus discipline and i thought who is
calling who a lost generation? then as i was getting up to the closerie des
lilas with the light on my old friend, the statue of marshal ney with his sword
out and the shadows of the trees on the bronze, and he alone there and nobody
behind him and what a fiasco he'd made of waterloo, i thought that all
generations were lost by something and always had been and always would be and
i stopped at the lilas to keep the statue company and drank a cold beer before
going home to the flat over the sawmill. but sitting there with the beer,
watching the statue and remembering how many days ney had fought, personally,
with the rearguard on the retreat from moscow that napoleon had ridden away
from in the coach with caulaincourt, i thought of what a warm and affectionate
friend miss stein had been and how beautifully she had spoken of apollinaire
and of his death on the day of the armistice in 1918 with the crowd shouting 'a
bas guillaume' and apollinaire, in his delirium, thinking they were crying
against him, and i thought, i will do my best to serve her and see she gets
justice for the good work she had done as long as i can, so help me god and
mike ney. but the hell with her lost-generation talk and all the dirty, easy
labels. when i got home and into the courtyard and upstairs and saw my wife and
my son and his cat, f. puss, all of them happy and a fire in the fireplace, i said
to my wife, 'you know, gertrude is  nice, anyway.' 

            'Of
course, tatie.' 

            'But
she does talk a lot of rot sometimes.' 

            'I
never hear her,' my wife said. 'i'm a wife. it's her friend that talks to me.'

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–4–

Shakespeare and
Company

 

 

            In
those days there was no money to buy books. I borrowed books from the rental
library of Shakespeare and company, which was the library and bookstore of
Sylvia Beach at 12 rue de l'Odeon. on a cold windswept street, this was a warm,
cheerful place with a big stove in winter, tables and shelves of books, new
books in the window, and photographs on the wall of famous writers both dead
and living. the photographs all looked like snapshots and even the dead writers
looked as though they had really been alive. Sylvia had a lively, sharply
sculptured face, brown eyes that were as alive as a small animal's and as gay
as a young girl's, and wavy brown hair that was brushed back from her fine
forehead and cut thick below her ears and at the line of the collar of the
brown velvet jacket she wore. she had pretty legs and she was kind, cheerful
and interested, and loved to make jokes and gossip. no one that i ever knew was
nicer to me. 

            I
was very shy when i first went into the bookshop and i did not have enough
money on me to join the rental library. she told me i could pay the deposit any
time i had the money and made me out a card and said i could take as many books
as i wished. 

            There
was no reason for her to trust me. she did not know me and the address i had
given her, 74 rue cardinal lemoine, could not have been a poorer one. but she
was delightful and charming and welcoming and behind her, as high as the wall
and stretching out into the back room which gave onto the inner court of the
building, were shelves and shelves of the wealth of the library. 

            I
started with turgenev and took the two volumes of a sportsman's sketches and
an early book of d. h. lawrence, i think it was sons and lovers, and
sylvia told me to take more books if i wanted. I chose the constance garnett
edition of war and peace, and the gambler and other stories by
dostoevsky. 

            'You
won't be back very soon if you read all that,' sylvia said. 

            'I'll
be back to pay,' i said. 'i have some money in the flat.' 

            'I
didn't mean that,' she said. 'you pay whenever it's convenient.' 

            'When
does joyce come in?' i asked. 

            'If
he comes in, it's usually very late in the afternoon,' she said. 'haven't you
ever seen him?' 

            'We've
seen him at michaud's eating with his family,' i said. 'but it's not polite to
look at people when they are eating, and michaud's is expensive.' 

            'Do
you eat at home?' 

            'Mostly
now,' i said. 'we have a good cook.' 

            'There
aren't any restaurants in your immediate quarter, are there?' 

            'no.
how did you know?' 

            'larbaud
lived there,' she said. 'he liked it very much except for that.' 

            'The
nearest good cheap place to eat is over by the pantheon.' 

            'I
don't know that quarter. we eat at home. you and your wife must come sometime.'

            'Wait
until you see if i pay you,' i said. 'but thank you very much.' 

            'Don't
read too fast,' she said. 

            Home
in the rue cardinal lemoine was a two-room flat that had no hot water and no
inside toilet facilities except an antiseptic container, not uncomfortable to
anyone who was used to a michigan outhouse. with a fine view and a good
mattress and springs for a comfortable bed on the floor, and pictures we liked
on the walls, it was a cheerful, gay flat. when i got there with the books i
told my wife about the wonderful place i had found. 

            'But
tatie, you must go by this afternoon and pay,' she said. 

            'Sure
i will,' i said. 'we'll both go. and then we'll walk down by the river and
along the quais.' 

            'Let's
walk down the rue de seine and look in all the galleries and in the windows of
the shops.' 

            'Sure.
we can walk anywhere and we can stop at some new cafe where we don't know
anyone and nobody knows us and have a drink.' 

            'We
can have two drinks.' 'then we can eat somewhere.' 'no. don't forget we have to
pay the library.' 'we'll come home and eat here and we'll have a lovely meal
and drink beaune from the co-operative you can see right out of the window
there with the price of the beaune on the window. and afterwards we'll read and
then go to bed and make love.' 

            'And
we'll never love anyone else but each other.' 'no. never.' 

            'What
a lovely afternoon and evening. now we'd better have lunch.' 

            'I'm
very hungry,' i said. 'i worked at the cafe on a cafe creme.' 

            'How
did it go, tatie?' 

            'I
think all right. i hope so. what do we have for lunch?' 'little radishes, and good
foie de veau with mashed potatoes and an endive salad. apple tart.' 

            'And
we're going to have all the books in the world to read and when we go on trips
we can take them.' 'would that be honest?' 'sure.' 

            'Does
she have henry james too?' 'sure.' 

            'My,'
she said. 'we're lucky that you found the place.' 'we're always lucky,' i said
and like a fool i did not knock on wood. there was wood everywhere in that
apartment to knock on too.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–5–

People of the Seine

 

 

            There
were many ways of walking down to the river from the top of the rue cardinal
lemoine. the shortest one was straight down the street but it was steep and it
brought you out, after you hit the flat part and crossed the busy traffic of
the beginning of the boulevard st-germain, onto a dull part where there was a
bleak, windy stretch of river bank with the halle aux vins on your right. this
was not like any other paris market but was a sort of bonded warehouse where
wine was stored against the payment of taxes and was as cheerless from the
outside as a military depot or a prison camp. 

            across
the branch of the seine was the ile st-louis with the narrow streets and the
old, tall, beautiful houses, and you could go over there or you could turn left
and walk along the quais with the length of the ile st-louis and then
notre-dame and ile de la cite opposite as you walked. 

            in
the bookstalls along the quais you could sometimes find american books that had
just been published for sale very cheap. the tour d'argent restaurant had a few
rooms above the restaurant that they rented in those days, giving the people
who lived there a discount in the restaurant, and if the people who lived there
left any books behind there was a bookstall not far along the quai where the valet
de chambre  sold them and you could
buy them from the proprietress for a very few francs. she had no confidence in
books written in english, paid almost nothing for them, and sold them for a
small and quick profit. 

            'are
they any good?' she asked me after we had become friends. 

            'sometimes
one is.' 

            'how
can anyone tell?' 

            'i
can tell when i read them.' 

            'but
still it is a form of gambling. and how many people can read english?' 

            'save
them for me and let me look them over.' 

            'no.
i can't save them. you don't pass regularly. you stay away too long at a time.
i have to sell them as soon as i can. no one can tell if they are worthless. if
they turn out to be worthless, i would never sell them.' 

            'how
do you tell a valuable french book?' 'first there are the pictures. then it is
a question of the quality of the pictures. then it is the binding. if a book is
good, the owner will have it bound properly. all books in english are bound,
but bound badly. 

            there
is no way of judging them.' 

            after
that bookstall near the tour d'argent there were no others that sold american
and english books until the quai des grands augustins. there were several from
there on to beyond the quai voltaire that sold books they bought from employees
of the left-bank hotels and especially the hotel voltaire, which had a
wealthier clientele than most. one day i asked another woman stall-keeper who
was a friend of mine if the owners ever sold the books. 

            'no,'
she said. 'they are all thrown away. that is why one knows they have no value.'

            'friends
give them to them to read on the boats.' 'doubtless,' she said. 'they must
leave many on the boats.' 'they do,' i said. 'the line keeps them and binds
them and they become the ships' libraries.' 

            'that's
intelligent,' she said. 'at least they are properly bound then. now a book like
that would have value.' 

            i
would walk along the quais when i had finished work or when i was trying to
think something out. it was easier to think if i was walking and doing
something or seeing people doing something that they understood. at the head of
the ile de la cite below the pont neuf where there was the statue of henri
quatre, the island ended in a point like the sharp bow of a ship and there was
a small park at the water's edge with fine chestnut trees, huge and spreading, and
in the currents and backwaters that the seine made flowing past, there were
excellent places to fish. you went down a stairway to the park and watched the
fishermen there and under the great bridge. the good spots to fish changed with
the height of the river and the fishermen used long, jointed, cane poles but
fished with very fine leaders and light gear and quill floats and expertly
baited the piece of water that they fished. they always caught some fish, and
often they made excellent catches of the dace-like fish that were called goujon.
 they were delicious fried whole and
i could eat a plateful. they were plump and sweet-fleshed with a finer flavour
than fresh sardines even, and were not at all oily, and we ate them bones and
all. 

            one
of the best places to eat them was at an open-air restaurant built out over the
river at bas meudon where we would go when we had money for a trip away from
our quarter. it was called la peche miraculeuse and had a splendid white wine
that was a sort of muscadet. it was a place out of a maupassant story with the
view over the river as sisley had painted it. you did not have to go that far
to eat goujon.  you could get a
very good friture  on the ile
st-louis. 

            i
knew several of the men who fished the fruitful parts of the seine between the
he st-louis and the place du vert-galant and sometimes, if the day was bright,
i would buy a litre of wine and a piece of bread and some sausage and sit in
the sun and read one of the books i had bought and watch the fishing. 

            travel
writers wrote about the men fishing in the seine as though they were crazy and
never caught anything; but it was serious and productive fishing. most of the
fishermen were men who had small pensions, which they did not know then would
become worthless with inflation, or keen fishermen who fished on their days or
half-days off from work. there was better fishing at charenton, where the marne
came into the seine, and on either side of paris, but there was very good
fishing in paris itself. i did not fish because i did not have the tackle and i
preferred to save my money to fish in spain. then too i never knew when i would
be through working, nor when i would have to be away, and i did not want to
become involved in the fishing which had its good times and its slack times.
but i followed it closely and it was interesting and good to know about, and it
always made me happy that there were men fishing in the city itself, having
sound, serious fishing and taking a few fritures  home to their families. 

            with
the fishermen and the life on the river, the beautiful barges with their own
life on board, the tugs with their smoke-stacks that folded back to pass under
the bridges, pulling a tow of barges, the great elms on the stone banks of the
river, the plane trees and in some places the poplars, i could never be lonely
along the river. with so many trees in the city, you could see the spring
coming each day until a night of warm wind would bring it suddenly in one
morning. sometimes the heavy cold rains would beat it back so that it would
seem that it would never come and that you were losing a season out of your
life. this was the only truly sad time in paris because it was unnatural. you
expected to be sad in the fall. part of you died each year when the leaves fell
from the trees and their branches were bare against the wind and the cold,
wintry light. but you knew there would always be the spring, as you knew the
river would flow again after it was frozen. when the cold rains kept on and
killed the spring, it was as though a young person had died for no reason. 

            in
those days, though, the spring always came finally but it was frightening that
it had nearly failed.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–6–

A False Spring

 

 

            When
spring came, even the false spring, there were no problems except where to be
happiest. the only thing that could spoil a day was people and if you could
keep from making engagements, each day had no limits. people were always the
limiters of happiness except for the very few that were as good as spring
itself. 

            In
the spring mornings i would work early while my wife still slept. the windows
were open wide and the cobbles of the street were drying after the rain. the
sun was drying the wet faces of the houses that faced the window. the shops
were still shuttered. the goatherd came up the street blowing his pipes and a
woman who lived on the floor above us came out onto the sidewalk with a big
pot. the goatherd chose one of the heavy-bagged, black milk-goats and milked
her into the pot while his dog pushed the others onto the sidewalk. the goats
looked around, turning their necks like sightseers. the goatherd took the money
from the woman and thanked her and went on up the street piping and the dog
herded the goats on ahead, their horns bobbing. i went back to writing and the
woman came up the stairs with the goat milk. she wore her felt-soled cleaning
shoes and i only heard her breathing as she stopped on the stairs outside our
door and then the shutting of her door. she was the only customer for goat milk
in our building. 

            I
decided to go down and buy a morning racing paper. there was no quarter too
poor to have at least one copy of a racing paper but you had to buy it early on
a day like this. i found one in the rue descartes at the corner of the place
contrescarpe. the goats were going down the rue descartes and i breathed the
air in and walked back fast to climb the stairs and get my work done. i had
been tempted to stay out and follow the goats down the early-morning street.
but before i started work again i looked at the paper. they were running at Enghien,
the small, pretty and larcenous track that was the home of the outsider. 

            so
that day after i had finished work we would go racing. some money had come from
the toronto paper that i did newspaper work for and we wanted a long shot if we
could find one. my wife had a horse one time at auteuil named chèvre d'or that
was a hundred and twenty to one and leading by twenty lengths when he fell at
the last jump with enough savings on him to keep us six months. we tried never
to think of that. we were ahead on that year until chèvre d'or. 

            'do
we have enough money to really bet, tatie?' my wife asked. 

            'no.
we'll just figure to spend what we take. is there something else you'd rather
spend it for?' 

            'well,'
she said. 

            'i
know. it's been terribly hard and i've been tight and mean about money.' 

            'no,'
she said. 'but—' 

            i
knew how severe i had been and how bad things had been. the one who is doing
his work and getting satisfaction from it is not the one the poverty bothers. i
thought of bathtubs and showers and toilets that flushed as things that
inferior people to us had or that you enjoyed when you made trips, which we
often made. there was always the public bath-house down at the foot of the
street by the river. my wife had never complained once about these things any
more than she cried about chèvre d'or when he fell. she had cried for the
horse, i remembered, but not for the money. i had been stupid when she needed a
grey lamb jacket and had loved it once she had bought it. i had been stupid
about other things too. it was all part of the fight against poverty that you
never win except by not spending. especially if you buy pictures instead of
clothes. but then we did not think ever of ourselves as poor. we did not accept
it. we thought we were superior people and other people that we looked down on
and rightly mistrusted were rich. it had never seemed strange to me to wear
sweatshirts for underwear to keep warm. it only seemed odd to the rich. we ate
well and cheaply and drank well and cheaply and slept well and warm together
and loved each other. 

            'i
think we ought to go,' my wife said. 'we haven't been for such a long time.
we'll take a lunch and some wine. i'll make good sandwiches.' 

            'we'll
go on the train and it's cheap that way. but let's not go if you don't think we
should. anything we'd do today would be fun. it's a wonderful day.' 

            'i
think we should go.' 

            'you
wouldn't rather spend it some other way?' 

            'no,'
she said arrogantly. she had the lovely high cheekbones for arrogance. 'who are
we anyway?' 

            so
we went out by the train from the gare du nord through the dirtiest and saddest
part of town and walked from the siding to the oasis of the track. it was early
and we sat on my raincoat on the fresh-cropped grass bank and had our lunch and
drank from the wine bottle and looked at the old grandstand, the brown wooden
betting booths, the green of the track, the darker green of the hurdles, and
the brown shine of the water jumps and the whitewashed stone walls and white
posts and rails, the paddock under the new-leafed trees and the first horses
being walked to the paddock. we drank more wine and studied the form in the
paper and my wife lay down on the raincoat to sleep with the sun on her face. i
went over and found someone i knew from the old days at san siro in milano. he
gave me two horses. 

            'mind,
they're no investment. but don't let the price put you off.' 

            we
won the first with half of the money that we had to spend and he paid twelve to
one, jumping beautifully, taking command on the far side of the course and
coming in four lengths ahead. we saved half of the money and put it away and
bet the other half on the second horse who broke ahead, led all the way over
the hurdles and on the flat just lasted to the finish line with the favourite
gaining on him with every jump and the two whips flailing. 

            we
went to have a glass of champagne at the bar under the stand and wait for the
prices to go up. 

            'my,
but racing is very hard on people,' my wife said. 'did you see that horse come
up on him?' 

            'i
can still feel it inside me.' 

            'what
will he pay?' 

            'the
cote  was eighteen to one. but
they may have bet him at the last.' 

            the
horses came by, ours wet, with his nostrils working wide to breathe, the jockey
patting him. 

            'poor
him,' my wife said. 'we just bet.' 

            we
watched them go on by and had another glass of champagne and then the winning
price came up: 85. that meant he paid eighty-five francs for ten. 

            'they
must have put a lot of money on at the end,' i said. 

            but
we had made plenty of money, big money for us, and now we had spring and money
too. i thought that was all we needed. a day like that one, if you split the
winnings one quarter for each to spend, left a half for racing capital. i kept
the racing capital secret and apart from all other capital. 

            another
day later that year when we had come back from one of our voyages and had good
luck at some track again we stopped at prunier's on the way home, going in to
sit at the bar after looking at all the clearly priced wonders in the window.
we had oysters and crabe mexicaine  with glasses of sancerre. we walked back
through the tuilleries in the dark and stood and looked through the arc du
carrousel up across the dark gardens with the lights of the concorde behind the
formal darkness and then the long rise of lights towards the arc de triomphe.
then we looked towards the dark of the louvre and i said, 'do you really think
that the three arches are in line? these two and the sermione in milano?' 

            'i
don't know, tatie. they say so and they ought to know. do you remember when we
came out into the spring on the italian side of the st bernard after the climb
in the snow, and you and chink and i walked down all day in the spring to
aosta?' 

            'chink
called it "across the st bernard in street shoes". remember your
shoes?' 

            'my
poor shoes. do you remember us having fruit cup at biffi's in the galleria with
capri and fresh peaches and wild strawberries in a tall glass pitcher with
ice?' 

            'that
time was what made me wonder about the three arches.' 

            'i
remember the sermione. it's like this arch.' 

            'do
you remember the inn at aigle where you and chink sat in the garden that day
and read while i fished?' 

            'yes,
tatie.' 

            i
remembered the rhone, narrow and grey and full of snow water and the two trout
streams on either side, the stockalper and the rhone canal. the stockalper was
really clear that day and the rhone canal was still murky. 

            'do
you remember when the horse-chestnut trees were in bloom and how i tried to
remember a story that jim gamble, i think, had told me about a wistaria vine
and i couldn't remember it?' 

            'yes,
tatie, and you and chink always talking about how to make things true, writing
them, and put them rightly and not describe. i remember everything. 

            sometimes
he was right and sometimes you were right. i remember the lights and textures
and the shapes you argued about.' 

            now
we had come out of the gateway through the louvre and crossed the street
outside and were standing on the bridge leaning on the stone and looking down
at the river. 

            'we
all three argued about everything and always specific things and we made fun of
each other. i remember everything we ever did and everything we ever said on
the whole trip,' hadley said. 'i do really. about everything. when you and
chink talked i was included. it wasn't like being a wife at miss stein's.' 

            'i
wish i could remember the story about the wistaria vine.' 

            'it
wasn't important. it was the vine that was important, tatie.' 

            'do
you remember i brought some wine from aigle home to the chalet? they sold it to
us at the inn. they said it should go with the trout. we brought it wrapped in
copies of la gazette de lausanne,  i think.' 

            "the
sion wine was even better. do you remember how mrs gangeswisch cooked the trout
au bleu  when we got back 

            to
the chalet? they were such wonderful trout, tatie, and we drank the sion wine
and ate out on the porch with the mountainside dropping off below and we could
look across the lake and see the dent du midi with the snow half down it and
the trees at the mouth of the rhone where it flowed into the lake.' 

            'we
always miss chink in the winter and the spring.' 

            'always.
and i miss him now when it is gone.' 

            chink
was a professional soldier and had gone out to mons from sandhurst. i had met
him first in italy and he had been my best friend and then our best friend for
a long time. he spent his leaves with us then. 

            'he's
going to try to get leave this next spring. he wrote last week from cologne.' 

            'i
know. we should live in this time now and have every minute of it.' 

            'we're
watching the water now as it hits this buttress. look what we can see when we
look up the river.' 

            we
looked and there it all was: our river and our city and the island of our city.

            'we're
too lucky,' she said. 'i hope chink will come. he takes care of us.' 

            'he
doesn't think so.' 

            'of
course not.' 

            'he
thinks we explore together.' 

            'we
do. but it depends on what you explore.' 

            we
walked across the bridge and were on our own side of the river. 

            'are
you hungry again?' i said. 'us. talking and walking.' 

            'of
course, tatie. aren't you?' 

            'let's
go to a wonderful place and have a truly grand dinner.' 

            'where?'

            'michaud's?'

            'that's
perfect and it's so close.' 

            so
we walked up the rue des saints-peres to the corner of the rue jacob, stopping
and looking in the windows at pictures and at furniture. we stood outside of
michaud's restaurant reading the posted menu. michaud's was crowded and we
waited for people to come out, watching the tables where people already had
their coffee. 

            we
were hungry again from walking and michaud's was an exciting and expensive
restaurant for us. it was where joyce ate with his family then, he and his wife
against the wall, joyce peering at the menu through his thick glasses, holding
the menu up in one hand; nora by him, a hearty but delicate eater; giorgio
thin, foppish, sleek-headed from the back; lucia with heavy curly hair, a girl
not quite yet grown; all of them talking italian. 

            standing
there i wondered how much of what we had felt on the bridge was just hunger. i
asked my wife and she said, 'i don't know, tatie. there are so many sorts of
hunger. in the spring there are more. but that's gone now. memory is hunger.' 

            i
was being stupid, and looking in the window and seeing two tournedos  being served i knew i was hungry in a simple
way. 

            'you
said we were lucky today. of course we were. but we had very good advice and
information.' 

            she
laughed. 

            'i
didn't mean about the racing. you're such a literal boy. i meant lucky other
ways.' 

            'i
don't think chink cares for racing,' i said, compounding my stupidity. 

            'no.
he'd only care for it if he were riding.' 

            'don't
you want to go racing any more?' 

            'of
course. and now we can go whenever we want again.' 

            'but
you really want to go?' 

            'of
course. you do, don't you?' 

            it
was a wonderful meal at michaud's after we got in; but when we had finished and
there was no question of hunger any more, the feeling that had been like hunger
when we were on the bridge was still there when we caught the bus home. it was
there when we came in the room and after we had gone to bed and made love in
the dark, it was there. when i woke with the windows open and the moonlight on
the roofs of the tall houses, it was there. i put my face away from the
moonlight into the shadow but i could not sleep and lay awake thinking about
it. we had both wakened twice in the night and my wife slept sweetly now with
the moonlight on her face. i had to try to think it out and i was too stupid.
life had seemed so simple that morning when i had wakened and found the false
spring and heard the pipes of the man with his herd of goats and gone out and
bought the racing paper. 

            but
paris was a very old city and we were young and nothing was simple there, not
even poverty, nor sudden money, nor the moonlight, nor right and wrong, nor the
breathing of someone who lay beside you in the moonlight.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–7–

The
End of an Avocation

 

 

            We
went racing together many more times that year and other years after i had worked
in the early mornings, and hadley enjoyed it and sometimes she loved it. but it
was not the climbs in the high mountain meadows above the last forest, nor
nights coming home to the chalet, nor was it climbing with chink, our best
friend, over a high pass into new country. it was not really racing either. it
was gambling on horses. but we called it racing. 

            racing
never came between us, only people could do that; but for a long time it stayed
close to us like a demanding friend. that was a generous way to think of it. i,
the one who was so righteous about people and their destructiveness, tolerated
this friend that was the falsest, most beautiful, most exciting, vicious, and
demanding because she could be profitable. to make it profitable was more than
a full-time job and i had no time for that. but i justified it to myself
because i wrote it, even though in the end, when everything i had written, was
lost, there was only one racing story that survived, because it was out in the
mails. 

            i
was going to races alone more now and i was involved in them and getting too
mixed up with them. i worked two tracks in their season when i could, auteuil
and enghien. it took full-time work to try to handicap intelligently and you
could make no money that way. that was just how it worked out on paper. you
could buy a newspaper that gave you that. 

            you
had to watch a jumping race from the top of the stands at auteuil and it was a
fast climb up to see what each horse did and see the horse that might have won
and did not, and see why or maybe how he did not do what he could have done.
you watched the prices and all the shifts of odds each time a horse you were
following would start, and you had to know how he was working and finally get
to know when the stable would try with him. he always might be beaten when he
tried; but you should know by then what his chances were. 

            it
was hard work but at auteuil it was beautiful to watch each day they raced when
you could be there and see the honest races with the great horses, and you got
to know the course as well as any place you had ever known. you knew many
people finally, jockeys and trainers and owners and too many horses and too
many things.. 

            in
principle i only bet when i had a horse to bet on but i sometimes found horses
that nobody believed in except the men who trained and rode them that won race
after race with me betting on them. i stopped finally because it took too much
time, i was getting too involved and i knew too much about what went on at
enghien and at the flat-racing tracks too. 

            when
i stopped working on the races i was glad but it left an emptiness. by then i
knew that everything good and bad left an emptiness when it stopped. but if it
was bad, the emptiness filled up by itself. if it was good you could only fill
it by finding something better. i put the racing capital back into the general
funds and i felt relaxed and good. 

            The
day i gave up racing i went over to the other side of the river and met my
friend mike ward at the travel desk in the guaranty trust which was then at the
corner of the rue des italiens on the boulevard des italiens. i was depositing
the racing capital but i did not tell that to anyone. i didn't put it in the
chequebook though i still kept it in my head. 

            'want
to go to lunch?' i asked mike. 

            'sure,
kid. yeah i can do it. what's the matter? aren't you going to the track?' 

            'no.'

            we
had lunch at the square louvois at a very good, plain bistro with a wonderful
white wine. across the square was the bibliotheque nationale. 

            'you
never went to the track much, mike,' i said. 

            'no.
not for quite a long time.' 

            'why
did you lay off it?' 

            'i
don't know,' mike said. 'yes. sure i do. anything you have to bet on to get a
kick isn't worth seeing.' 

            'don't
you ever go out?' 

            'sometimes
to see a big race. one with great horses.' 

            we
spread pate on the good bistro bread and drank the white wine. 

            'did
you follow them a lot, mike?' 

            'oh
yes.' 

            'what
do you see that's better?' 

            'bicycle
racing.' 

            'really?'

            'you
don't have to bet on it. you'll see.' 

            'that
track takes a lot of time.' 

            'too
much time. takes all your time. i don't like the people.' 

            'i
was very interested.' 

            'sure.
you make out all right?' 

            'all
right.' 

            'good
thing to stop,' mike said. 

            'i've
stopped.' 

            'hard
to do. listen, kid, we'll go to the bike races sometime.' 

            that
was a new and fine thing that i knew little about. but we did not start it
right away. that came later. it came to be a big part of our lives later when
the first part of paris was broken up. 

            but
for a long time it was enough just to be back in our part of paris and away
from the track and to bet on our own life and work, and on the painters that
you knew and not try to make your living gambling and call it by some other
name. i have started many stories about bicycle racing but have never written
one that is as good as the races are both on the indoor and outdoor tracks and
on the roads. but i will get the velodrome d'hiver with the smoky light of the
afternoon and the high-banked wooden track and the whirring sound the tyres
made on the wood as the riders passed, the effort and the tactics as the riders
climbed and plunged, each one a part of his machine; i will get the magic of
the demi-fond,  the noise of the
motors with their rollers set out behind them that the entraineurs  rode, wearing their heavy crash helmets and
leaning backwards in their ponderous leather suits, to shelter the riders who
followed them from the air resistance, the riders in their lighter crash
helmets bent low over their handlebars, their legs turning the huge gear
sprockets and the small front wheels touching the roller behind the machine
that gave them shelter to ride in, and the duels that were more exciting than
anything, the put-puting of  the
motorcycles and the riders elbow to elbow and wheel to wheel up and down and
around at deadly speed until one man could not hold the pace and broke away and
the solid wall of air that he had been sheltered against hit him. 

            there
were so many kinds of racing. the straight sprints raced in heats or in match
races where the two riders would balance for long seconds on their machines for
the advantage of making the other rider take the lead, and then the slow
circling and the final plunge into the driving purity of speed. there were the
programmes of the team races of two hours, with a series of pure sprints in
their heats to fill the afternoon, the lonely absolute speed events of one man
racing an hour against the clock, the terribly dangerous and beautiful races of
one hundred kilometres on the big banked wooden five-hundred-metre bowl of the
stade buffalo, the outdoor stadium at montrouge where they raced behind big
motorcycles, linart, the great belgian champion that they called 

            'the
sioux' for his profile, dropping his head to suck up cherry brandy from a
rubber tube that connected with a hot-water bottle under his racing shirt when
he needed it towards the end as he increased his savage speed, and the
championships of france behind big motors of the six-hundred-and-sixty metre
cement track of the pare du prince near auteuil, the wickedest track of all
where we saw that great rider ganay fall and heard his skull crumple under the
crash helmet as you crack a hard-boiled egg against a stone to peel it on a
picnic. i must write the strange world of the six-day races and the marvels of
the road-racing in the mountains. french is the only language it has ever been
written in properly and the terms are all french and that is what makes it hard
to write. mike was right about it, there is no need to bet. but that comes at
another time in paris.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–8–

Hunger Was Good
Discipline

 

 

            You
got very hungry when you did not eat enough in paris because all the bakery
shops had such good things in the windows and people ate outside at tables on
the sidewalk so that you saw and smelled the food. when you had given up
journalism and were writing nothing that anyone in america would buy,
explaining at home that you were lunching out with someone, the best place to
go was the luxembourg gardens where you saw and smelled nothing to eat all the
way from the place de l'observatoire to the rue de vaugirard. there you could
always go into the luxembourg museum and all the paintings were sharpened and
clearer and more beautiful if you were belly-empty, hollow-hungry. i learned to
understand cezanne much better and to see truly how he made landscapes when i
was hungry. i used to wonder if he were hungry too when he painted; but i
thought possibly it was only that he had forgotten to eat. it was one of those
unsound but illuminating thoughts you have when you have been sleepless or
hungry. later i thought cezanne was probably hungry in a different way. 

            after
you came out of the luxembourg you could walk down the narrow rue ferou to the
place st-sulpice and there were still no restaurants, only the quiet square
with its benches and trees. there was a fountain with lions, and pigeons walked
on the pavement and perched on the statues of the bishops. there was the church
and there were shops selling religious objects and vestments on the north side
of the square. 

            From
this square you could not go farther towards the river without passing shops
selling fruits, vegetables, wines, or bakery and pastry shops. but by choosing
your way carefully you could work to your right around the grey and white stone
church and reach the rue de l'odeon and turn up to your right towards sylvia
beach's bookshop and on your way you did not pass too many places where things
to eat were sold. the rue de l'odeon was bare of eating places until you
reached the square, where there were three restaurants. 

            by
the time you reached 12 rue de l'odeon your hunger was contained but all of
your perceptions were heightened again. the photographs looked different and
you saw books that you had never seen before. 

            'you're
too thin, hemingway,' sylvia would say. 'are you eating enough?' 

            'sure.'

            'what
did you eat for lunch?' 

            my
stomach would turn over and i would say, 'i'm going home for lunch now.' 

            'at
three o'clock?' 

            'i
didn't know it was that late.' 

            'adrienne
said the other night she wanted to have you and hadley for dinner. we'd ask
fargue. you like fargue, don't you? or larbaud. you like him. i know you like
him. or anyone you really like. will you speak to hadley?' 

            'i
know she'd love to come.' 

            'i'll
send her a pneu.  don't you work
so hard now that you don't eat properly.' 

            'i
won't.' 

            'get
home now before it's too late for lunch.' 

            'they'll
save it.' 

            'don't
eat cold food either. eat a good hot lunch.' 

            'did
i have any mail?' 

            'i
don't think so. but let me look.' 

            she
looked and found a note and looked up happily and then opened a closed door in
her desk. 

            'this
came while i was out,' she said. it was a letter and it felt as though it had
money in it. 'wedderkop,' sylvia said. 

            'it
must be from der querschnitt.  did
you see wedderkop?' 

            'no.
but he was here with george. he'll see you. don't worry. perhaps he wanted to
pay you first.' 

            'it's
six hundred francs. he says there will be more.' 

            'i'm
awfully glad you reminded me to look. dear mr awfully nice.' 

            'it's
damned funny that germany is the only place i can sell anything. to him and the
frankfurter zeitung.' 

            'isn't
it? but don't you worry ever. you can sell stories to ford,' she teased me. 

            "thirty
francs a page. say one story every three months in the transatlantic.  story five pages long makes one hundred and
fifty francs a quarter. six hundred francs a year.' 

            'but,
hemingway, don't worry about what they bring now. the point is that you can write
them.' 

            'i
know. i can write them. but nobody will buy them. there is no money coming in
since i quit journalism.' 

            'they
will sell. look. you have the money for one right there.' 

            'i'm
sorry, sylvia. forgive me for speaking about it.' 

            'forgive
you for what? always talk about it or about anything. don't you know all
writers ever talk about is their troubles? but promise me you won't worry and
that you'll eat enough.' 

            'i
promise.' 

            'then
get home now and have lunch.' 

            outside
on the rue de l'odeon i was disgusted with myself for having complained about
things. i was doing what i did of my own free will and i was doing it stupidly.
i should have bought a large piece of bread and eaten it instead of skipping a
meal. i could taste the brown lovely crust. but it is dry in your mouth without
something to drink. you god-damn complainer. you dirty phony saint and martyr,
i said to myself. 

            you
quit journalism of your own accord. you have credit and sylvia would have
loaned you money. she has, plenty of times. sure. and then the next thing you
would be compromising on something else. hunger is healthy and the pictures do
look better when you are hungry. eating is wonderful too and do you know where
you are going to eat right now? 

            lipp's
is where you are going to eat, and drink too. 

            it
was a quick walk to lipp's and every place i passed that my stomach noticed as
quickly as my eyes or my nose made the walk an added pleasure. there were few
people in the brasserie  and when
i sat down on the bench against the wall with the mirror in back and a table in
front and the waiter asked if i wanted beer i asked for a distingue,  the big glass mug that held a litre, and for
potato salad. 

            the
beer was very cold and wonderful to drink. the pommes a l'huile  were firm and marinated and the olive oil
delicious. i ground black pepper over the potatoes and moistened the bread in
the olive oil. after the first heavy draught of beer i drank and ate very
slowly. when the pommes a l'huile  were gone i ordered another serving and a cervelas.
 this was a sausage like a heavy,
wide frankfurter split in two and covered with a special mustard sauce. 

            i
mopped up all the oil and all of the sauce with bread and drank the beer slowly
until it began to lose its coldness and then i finished it and ordered a demi
 and watched it drawn. it seemed
colder than the distingue  and i
drank half of it. 

            i
had not been worrying, i thought. i knew the stories were good and someone
would publish them finally at home. when i stopped doing newspaper work i was
sure the stories were going to be published. but every one i sent out came
back. what had made me so confident was edward o'brien's taking the my old
man  story for the bestshort
stories  book and then dedicating the
book for that year to me. then i laughed and drank some more beer. the story
had never been published in a magazine and he had broken all his rules to take
it for the book. i laughed again and the waiter glanced at me. it was funny
because, after all that, he had spelled the name wrong. it was one of two
stories i had left when everything i had written was stolen in hadley's
suitcase, that time at the gare de lyon when she was bringing the manuscripts
down to me to lausanne as a surprise, so i could work on them on our holidays
in the mountains. she had put in the originals, the typescripts and the
carbons, all in manilla folders. the only reason i had the one story was that
lincoln steffens had sent it out to some editor who sent it back. it was in the
mail while everything else was stolen. the other story that I had was the one
called up in michigan,  written
before miss stein had come to our flat. i had never had it copied because she
said it was in-afcrocbable.  it
had been in a drawer somewhere. 

            so
after we had left lausanne and gone down to italy i showed the racing story to
o'brien, a gentle, shy man, pale, with pale blue eyes, and straight lanky hair
he cut himself, who lived then as a boarder in a monastery up above rapallo. it
was a bad time and i did not think i could write any more then, and i showed
the story to him as a curiosity, as you might show, stupidly, the binnacle of a
ship you had lost in some incredible way, or as you might pick up your booted
foot and make some joke about it if it had been amputated after a crash. then,
when he read the story, i saw he was hurt far more than i was. i had never seen
anyone hurt by a thing other than death or unbearable suffering except hadley
when she told me about the things being gone. 

            she
had cried and cried and could not tell me. i told her that no matter what the
dreadful thing was that had happened nothing could be that bad, and whatever it
was, it was all right and not to worry. we would work it out. then, finally,
she told me. i was sure she could not have brought the carbons too and i hired
someone to cover for me on my newspaper job. i was making good money then at
journalism, and took the train for paris. it was true all right and i remember
what i did in the night after i let myself into the flat and found it was true.
that was over now and chink had taught me never to discuss casualties; so i
told o'brien not to feel so bad. it was probably good for me to lose early work
and i told him all that stuff you feed the troops. i was going to start writing
stories again i said and, as i said it, only trying to lie so that he would not
feel so bad, i knew that it was true. 

            then
i started to think in lipp's about when i had first been able to write a story
after losing everything. it was up in cortina d'ampezzo when i had come back to
join hadley there after the spring skiing which i had to interrupt to go on
assignment to the rhineland and the ruhr. it was a very simple story called out
of season  and i had omitted the real
end of it which was that the old man hanged himself. this was omitted on my new
theory that you could omit anything if you knew that you omitted and the
omitted part would strengthen the story and make people feel something more
than they understood. 

            well,
i thought, now i have them so they do not understand them. there cannot be much
doubt about that. there is most certainly no demand for them. but they will
understand the same way that they always do in painting. it only takes time and
it only needs confidence. 

            it
is necessary to handle yourself better when you have to cut down on food so you
will not get too much hunger-thinking. hunger is good discipline and you learn
from it. and as long as they do not understand it you are ahead of them. oh
sure, i thought, i'm so far ahead of them now that i can't afford to eat regularly.
it would not be bad if they caught up a little. 

            i
knew i must write a novel. but it seemed an impossible thing to do when i had
been trying with great difficulty to write paragraphs that would be the
distillation of what made a novel. it was necessary to write longer stories now
as you would train for a longer race. when i had written a novel before, the
one that had been lost in the bag stolen at the gare de lyon, i still had the
lyric facility of boyhood that was as perishable and as deceptive as youth was.
i knew it was probably a good thing that it was lost, but i knew too that i
must write a novel. i would put it off though until i could not help doing it.
i was damned if i would write one because it was what i should do if we were to
eat regularly. when i had to write it, then it would be the only thing to do
and there would be no choice. Let the pressure build. in the meantime i would
write a long story about whatever i knew best. 

            By
this time i had paid the check and gone out and turned to the right and crossed
the rue de rennes so that i would not go to the deux-magots for coffee and was
walking up the rue bonaparte on the shortest way home. 

            What
did i know best that i had not written about and lost? what did i know about
truly and care for the most? there was no choice at all. there was only the
choice of streets to take you back fastest to where you worked. it went up
bonaparte to guynemer, then to the rue d'assas, up the rue
notre-dame-des-champs to the closerie des lilas. 

            I
sat in a corner with the afternoon light coming in over my shoulder and wrote
in the notebook. the waiter brought me a cafe creme  and i drank half of it when it cooled and left
it on the table while i wrote. when i stopped writing i did not want to leave
the river where i could see the trout in the pool, its surface pushing and
swelling smooth against the resistance of the log-driven piles of the bridge.
the story was about coming back from the war but there was no mention of the
war in it. 

            But
in the morning the river would be there and i must make it and the country and
all that would happen. there were days ahead to be doing that each day. no
other thing mattered. in my pocket was the money from germany so there was no
problem. 

            When
that was gone some other money would come in. 

            All
i must do now was stay sound and good in my head until morning when i would
start to work again.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–9–

Ford
Madox Ford and the Devil's Disciple

 

 

            The
closerie des lilas was the nearest good cafe when we lived in the flat over the
sawmill at 113 rue notre-dame-des-champs, and it was one of the best cafes in
paris. 

            it
was warm inside in the winter, and in the spring and fall it was very fine
outside with the tables under the shade of the trees on the side where the
statue of marshal ney was, and the square, regular tables under the big awnings
along the boulevard. two of the waiters were our good friends. people from the
dome and the rotonde never came to the lilas. there was no one there they knew,
and no one would have stared at them if they came. in those days many people
went to the cafes at the corner of the boulevard montparnasse and the boulevard
raspail to be seen publicly and in a way such places anticipated the columnists
as the daily substitutes for immortality. 

            the
closerie des lilas had once been a cafe where poets met more or less regularly
and the last principal poet had been paul fort whom i had never read. but the
only poet i ever saw there was blaise cendrars, with his broken boxer's face
and his pinned-up empty sleeve, rolling a cigarette with his one good hand. he
was a good companion until he drank too much and, at that time, when he was
lying, he was more interesting than many men telling a story truly. but he was
the only poet who came to the lilas then and i only saw him there once. most of
the clients were elderly bearded men in well-worn clothes who came with their
wives or their mistresses and wore or did not wear thin red legion of honour
ribbons in their lapels. we thought of them all hopefully as scientists or savants
 and they sat almost as long over an
aperitif as the men in shabbier clothes who sat with their wives or mistresses
over a cafe creme  and wore the
purple ribbon of the palms of the academy, which had nothing to do with the
french academy, and meant, we thought, that they were professors or
instructors. 

            These
people made it a comfortable cafe since they were all interested in each other
and in their drinks or coffees, or infusions, and in the papers and periodicals
which were fastened to rods, and no one was on exhibition. 

            There
were other people too who lived in the quarter and came to the lilas, and some
of them wore croix de guerre ribbons in their lapels and others also had the
yellow and green of the medaille militaire, and i watched how well they were
overcoming the handicap of the loss of limbs, and saw the quality of their
artificial eyes and the degree of skill with which their faces had been
reconstructed. there was always an almost iridescent shiny cast about the
considerably reconstructed face, rather like that of a well-packed ski run, and
we respected these clients more than we did the savants  or the professors, although the latter might
well have done their military service too without experiencing mutilation. 

            In
those days we did not trust anyone who had not been in the war, but we did not
completely trust anyone, and there was a strong feeling that cendrars might
well be a little less flashy about his vanished arm. i was glad he had been in
the lilas early in the afternoon before the regular clients had arrived. 

            on
this evening i was sitting at a table outside of the lilas watching the light
change on the trees and the buildings and the passage of the great slow horses
of the outer boulevards. the door of the cafe opened behind me and to my right,
and a man came out and walked to my table. 

            'oh
here you are,' he said. 

            it
was ford madox ford, as he called himself then, and he was breathing heavily
through a heavy, stained moustache and holding himself as upright as an ambulatory,
well-clothed, up-ended hogshead. 

            'may
i sit with you?' he asked, sitting down, and his eyes which were a washed-out
blue under colourless lids and eyebrows looked out at the boulevard. 

            'i
spent good years of my life that those beasts should be slaughtered humanely,' 

            he
said. 

            'you
told me,' i said. 

            'i
don't think so.' 

            'i'm
quite sure.' 

            'very
odd. i've never told anyone in my life.' 

            'will
you have a drink?' 

            the
waiter stood there and ford told him he would have a chambery cassis. the
waiter, who was tall and thin and bald on the top of his head with hair slicked
over and who wore a heavy old-style dragoon moustache, repeated the order. 

            'no.
make it a fine a l'eau,'  ford
said. 

            'a.
fine a l'eau  for monsieur,' the
waiter confirmed the order. 

            i
had always avoided looking at ford when i could and i always held my breath
when i was near him in a closed room, but this was the open air and the fallen
leaves blew along the sidewalks from my side of the table past his, so i took a
good look at him, repented, and looked across the boulevard. the light was
changed again and i had missed the change. i took a drink to see if his coming
had fouled it, but it still tasted good. 

            'you're
very glum,' he said. 

            'no.'

            'yes
you are. you need to get out more. i stopped by to ask you to the little
evenings we're giving in that amusing bal musette near the place contrescarpe
on the rue cardinal lemoine.' 

            'i
lived above it for two years before you come to paris this last time.' 

            'how
odd. are you sure?' 

            'yes,'
i said. 'i'm sure. the man who owned it had a taxi and when i had to get a
plane he'd take me out to the field, and we'd stop at the zinc bar of the bal
and drink a glass of white wine in the dark before we'd start for the
airfield.' 

            'i've
never cared for flying,' ford said. 'you and your wife plan to come to the bal
musette saturday night. it's quite gay. i'll draw you a map so you can find it.
i stumbled on it quite by chance.' 

            'it's
under 74 rue cardinal lemoine,' i said. 'i lived on the third floor.' 

            'there's
no number,' ford said. 'but you'll be able to find it if you can find the place
contrescarpe.' 

            i
took another long drink. the waiter had brought ford's drink and ford was
correcting him. 'it wasn't a brandy and soda,' he said helpfully but severely.
'i ordered a chambery vermouth and cassis.' 

            'it's
all right, jean,' i said. 'i'll take the/w. bring monsieur what he orders now.'

            'what
i ordered,' corrected ford. 

            at
that moment a rather gaunt man wearing a cape passed on the sidewalk. he was
with a tall woman and he glanced at our table and then away and went on his way
down the boulevard. 

            'did
you see me cut him?' ford said. 'did  you see me cut him?' 

            'no.
who did you cut?' 'belloc,' ford said. 'did  i cut him!' 'i didn't see it,' i said. 'why
did you cut him?' 'for every good reason in the world,' ford said. 'did  i cut him though!' 

            he
was thoroughly and completely happy. i had never seen belloc and i did not
believe he had seen us. he looked like a man who had been thinking of something
and had glanced at the table almost automatically. i felt badly that ford had
been rude to him, as, being a young man who was commencing his education, i had
a high regard for him as an older writer. this is not understandable now but in
those days it was a common occurrence. 

            i
thought it would have been pleasant if belloc had stopped at the table and i
might have met him. the afternoon had been spoiled by seeing ford but i thought
belloc might have made it better. 

            'what
are you drinking brandy for?' ford asked me. 'don't you know it's fatal for a
young writer to start drinking brandy?' 

            'i
don't drink it very often,' i said. i was trying to remember what ezra pound
had told me about ford, that i must never be rude to him, that i must remember
that he only lied when he was very tired, that he was really a good writer and
that he had been through very bad domestic troubles. i tried hard to think of
these things but the heavy, wheezing, ignoble presence of ford himself, only
touching-distance away, made it difficult. but i tried. 

            'tell
me why one cuts people,' i asked. until then i had thought it was something
only done in novels by ouida. i had never been able to read a novel by ouida,
not even at some skiing place in switzerland where reading matter had run out
when the wet south wind had come and there were only the left-behind tauchnitz
editions of before the war. but i was sure, by some sixth sense, that people
cut one another in her novels. 

            'a
gentleman,' ford explained, 'will always cut a cad.' 

            i
took a quick drink of brandy. 

            'would
he cut a bounder?' i asked. 

            'it
would be impossible for a gentleman to know a bounder.' 

            'then
you can only cut someone you have known on terms of equality?' i pursued. 

            'naturally.'

            'how
would one ever meet a cad?' 

            'you
might not know it, or the fellow could have become a cad.' 

            'what
is a cad?' i asked. 'isn't he someone that one has to thrash within an inch of
his life?' 

            'not
necessarily,' ford said. 

            'is
ezra a gentleman?' i asked. 

            'of
course not,' ford said. 'he's an american.' 

            'can't
an american be a gentleman?' 

            terhaps
john quinn,' ford explained. 'certain of your ambassadors.' 

            'myron
t. herrick?' 

            'possibly.'

            'was
henry james a gentleman?' 

            'very
nearly.' 

            'are
you a gentleman?' 

            'naturally.
i have held his majesty's commission.' 

            'it's
very complicated,' i said. 'am i a gentleman?' 

            'absolutely
not,' ford said. 

            'then
why are you drinking with me?' 

            'i'm
drinking with you as a promising young writer. as a fellow writer, in fact.' 

            'good
of you,' i said. 

            'you
might be considered a gentleman in italy,' ford said magnanimously. 

            'but
i'm not a cad?' 

            'of
course not, dear boy. who ever said such a thing?' 

            'i
might become one,' i said sadly. 'drinking brandy and all. that was what did
for lord harry hotspur in trollope. tell me, was trollope a gentleman?' 

            'of
course not.' 

            'you're
sure?' 

            'there
might be two opinions. but not in mine.' 

            'was
fielding? he was a judge.' 

            'technically,
perhaps.' 

            'marlowe?'

            'of
course not.' 

            'john
donne?' 

            'he
was a parson.' 

            'it's
fascinating,' i said. 

            'i'm
glad you're interested,' ford said. 'i'll have a brandy and water with you
before i go.' 

            after
ford left it was dark and i walked over to the ktosque  and bought a paris-sport compkt,  the final edition of the afternoon racing
paper with the results at auteuil, and the line on the next day's meeting at
enghien. the waiter emile, who had replaced jean on duty, came to the table to
see the results of the last race at auteuil. a great friend of mine who rarely
came to the lilas came over to the table and sat down, and just then as my
friend was ordering a drink from emile the gaunt man in the cape with the tall
woman passed us on the sidewalk. his glance drifted towards the table and then
away. 

            'that's
hilaire belloc,' i said to my friend. 'ford was here this afternoon and cut him
dead.' 

            'don't
be a silly ass,' my friend said. 'that's aleister crowley, the diabolist. he's
supposed to be the wickedest man in the world.' 

            'sorry,'
i said.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–10–

Birth
of A New School

 

 

            The
blue-backed notebooks, the two pencils and the pencil sharpener (a pocket knife
was too wasteful), the marble-topped tables, the smell of early morning,
sweeping out and mopping, and luck were all you needed. for luck you carried a
horse chestnut and a rabbit's foot in your right pocket. the fur had been worn
off the rabbit's foot long ago and the bones and the sinews were polished by
wear. the claws scratched in the lining of your pocket and you knew your luck
was still there. 

            Some
days it went so well that you could make the country so that you could walk
into it through the timber to come out into the clearing and work up onto the
high ground and see the hills beyond the arm of the lake. a pencil-lead might
break off in the conical nose of the pencil sharpener and you would use the
small blade of the penknife to clear it or else sharpen the pencil carefully
with the sharp blade and then slip your arm through the sweat-salted leather of
your pack strap to lift the pack again, get the other arm through and feel the
weight settle on your back and feel the pine needles under your moccasins as
you started down for the lake. 

            then
you would hear someone say, 'hi, hem. what are you trying to do? write in a
cafe?' 

            your
luck had run out and you shut the notebook. this was the worst thing that could
happen. if you could keep your temper it would be better but i was not good at
keeping mine then and said, 'you rotten son of a bitch, what are you doing in
here off your filthy beat?' 

            'don't
be insulting just because you want to act like an eccentric.' 

            'take
your dirty camping mouth out of here.' 'it's a public cafe. i've just as much
right here as you have.' 'why don't you go up to the petite chaumiere where you
belong?' 

            'oh
dear. don't be so tiresome.' 

            now
you could get out and hope it was an accidental visit and that the visitor had
only come in by chance and there was not going to be an infestation. there were
other good cafes to work in but they were a long walk away and this was my home
cafe. it was bad to be driven out of the closerie des lilas. i had to make a
stand or move. it was probably wiser to move but the anger started to come and
i said, 'listen. a bitch like you has plenty of places to go. why do you have
to come here and louse a decent cafe?' 

            'i
just came in to have a drink. what's wrong with that?' 

            'at
home they'd serve you and then break the glass.' 

            'where's
home? it sounds like a charming place.' 

            he
was sitting at the next table, a tall fat young man with spectacles. he had
ordered a beer. i thought i would ignore him and see if i could write. so i
ignored him and wrote two sentences. 

            'all
i did was speak to you.' 

            i
went on and wrote another sentence. it dies hard when it is really going and
you are into it. 

            'i
suppose you've got so great nobody can speak to you.' 

            i
wrote another sentence that ended the paragraph and read it over. it was still
all right and i wrote the first sentence of the next paragraph. 

            'you
never think about anyone else or that they may have problems too.' 

            i
had heard complaining all my life. i found i could go on writing and that it
was no worse than other noises, certainly better than ezra learning to play the
bassoon. 

            'suppose
you wanted to be a writer and felt it in every part of your body and it just
wouldn't come.' 

            i
went on writing and i was beginning to have luck now as well as the other
thing. 

            'suppose
once it had come like an irresistible torrent and then it left you mute and silent.'

            better
than mute and noisy, i thought, and went on writing. he was in full cry now and
the unbelievable sentences were soothing as the noise of a plank being violated
in the sawmill. 

            'we
went to greece,' i heard him say later. i had not heard him for some time
except as noise. i was ahead now and i could leave it and go on tomorrow. 

            'you
say you used it or you went there?' 

            'don't
be vulgar,' he said. 'don't you want me to tell you the rest?' 

            'no,'
i said. i closed the notebook and put it in my pocket. 

            'don't
you care how it came out?' 

            'no.'

            'don't
you care about life and the suffering of a fellow human being?' 

            'not
you.' 

            'you're
beastly.' 

            'yes.'

            'i
thought you could help me, hem.' 

            'i'd
be glad to shoot you.' 

            'would
you?' 

            'no.
there's a law against it.' 

            'i'd
do anything for you.' 

            "would
you?' 

            'of
course i would.' 

            'then
keep the hell away from this cafe. start with that.' 

            i
stood up and the waiter came over and i paid. 

            'can
i walk down to the sawmill with you, hem?' 

            'no.'

            'well,
i'll see you some other time.' 

            'not
here.' 

            'that's
perfectly right,' he said. 'i promised.' 

            'what
are you writing?' i made a mistake and asked. 

            'i'm
writing the best i can. just as you do. but it's so terribly difficult.' 

            'you
shouldn't write if you can't write. what do you have to cry about it for? go
home. get a job. hang yourself. only don't talk about it. you could never
write.' 

            'why
do you say that?' 

            'did
you ever hear yourself talk?' 

            'it's
writing i'm talking about.' 

            "then
shut up.' 

            'you're
just cruel,' he said. 'everybody always said you were cruel and heartless and
conceited. i always defended you. but not any more.' 

            'good.'

            'how
can you be so cruel to a fellow human being?' 

            'i
don't know,' i said. 'look, if you can't write why don't you learn to write
criticism?' 

            'do
you think i should?' 

            'it
would be fine,' i told him. 'then you can always write. you won't ever have to
worry about it not coming nor being mute and silent. people will read it and
respect it.' 

            'do
you think i could be a good critic?' 

            'i
don't know how good. but you could be a critic. there will always be people who
will help you and you can help your own people.' 

            'what
do you mean, my own people?' 

            'the
ones you go around with.' 

            'oh
them. they have their critics.' 

            'you
don't have to criticize books,' i said. 'there's pictures, plays, ballet, the
cinema

            —'

            'you
make it sound fascinating, hem. thank you so much. it's so exciting. it's
creative too.' 

            'creation's
probably overrated. after all, god made the world in only six days and rested
on the seventh.' 

            'of
course there's nothing to prevent me doing creative writing too.' 

            'not
a thing. except you may set yourself impossibly high standards by your
criticism.' 

            'they'll
be high. you can count on that.' 

            'i'm
sure they will be.' 

            he
was a critic already, so i asked him if he would have a drink and he accepted. 

            'hem,'
he said, and i knew he was a critic now since, in conversation, they put your
name at the beginning of a sentence rather than at the end, 'i have to tell you
i find your work just a little too stark.' 

            'too
bad,' i said. 

            'hem,
it's too stripped, too lean.' 

            'bad
luck.' 

            'hem,
too stark, too stripped, too lean, too sinewy.' 

            i
felt the rabbit's foot in my pocket guiltily. 'i'll try to fatten it up a
little.' 

            'mind,
i don't want it obese.' 

            'hal,'
i said, practising speaking like a critic, 'i'll avoid that as long as i can.' 

            'glad
we see eye to eye,' he said manfully. 

            'you'll
remember about not coming here when i'm working?' 

            'naturally,
hem. of course. i'll have my own cafe now.' 

            'you're
very kind.' 

            'i
try to be,' he said. 

            it
would be interesting and instructive if the young man had turned out to be a
famous critic, but it did not turn out that way although i had high hopes for a
while. 

            i
did not think that he would come back the next day but i did not want to take
chances and i decided to give the closerie a day's rest. so the next morning i
woke early, boiled the rubber nipples and the bottles, made the formula,
finished the bottling, gave mr bumby a bottle and worked on the dining-room
table before anyone but he, f. puss the cat, and i were awake. the two of them
were quiet and good company and i worked better than i had ever done. in those
days you did not really need anything, not even the rabbit's foot, but it was good
to feel it in your pocket.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–11–

With
Pascin at the Dôme

 

 

            It
was a lovely evening and i had worked hard all day and left the flat over the
sawmill and walked out through the courtyard with the stacked lumber, closed
the door, crossed the street and went into the back door of the bakery that
fronted on the boulevard montparnasse and out through the good bread smells of
the ovens and the shop to the street. the lights were on in the bakery and
outside it was the end of the day and i walked in the early dusk up the street
and stopped outside the terrace of the negre de toulouse restaurant where our
red and white checkered napkins were in the wooden napkin rings in the napkin
rack waiting for us to come to dinner. i read the menu mimeographed in purple
ink and saw that the plat du jour  was cassoulet.  it made me hungry to read the name. 

            Mr
Lavigne, the proprietor, asked me how my work had gone and i said it had gone
very well. he said he had seen me working on the terrace of the closerie des
lilas early in the morning but he had not spoken to me because i was so
occupied. 

            'you
had the air of a man alone in the jungle,' he said. 

            'i
am like a blind pig when i work.' 

            'but
were you not in the jungle, monsieur?' 

            'In
the bush,' i said. 

            I
went on up the street looking in the windows and happy with the spring evening
and the people coming past. in the three principal cafes i saw people that i
knew by sight and others that i knew to speak to. but there were always much
nicer-looking people that i did not know that, in the evening with the lights
just coming on, were hurrying to some place to drink together, to eat together
and then to make love. the people in the principal cafes might do the same
thing or they might just sit and drink and talk and love to be seen by others.
the people that i liked and had not met went to the big cafes because they were
lost in them and no one noticed them and they could be alone in them and be
together. the big cafes were cheap then too, and all had good beer and the
aperitifs cost reasonable prices that were clearly marked on the saucers that
were served with them. 

            on
this evening i was thinking these wholesome but not original thoughts and
feeling extraordinarily virtuous because i had worked well and hard on a day
when i had wanted to go out to the races very badly. but at this time i could
not afford to go to the races, even though there was money to be made there if
you worked at it. it was before the days of saliva tests and other methods of
detecting artificially encouraged horses and doping was very extensively
practised. but handicapping beasts that are receiving stimulants, and detecting
the symptoms in the paddock and acting on your perceptions, which sometimes
bordered on the extrasensory, then backing them with money you cannot afford to
lose, is not the way for a young man supporting a wife and child to get ahead
in the full-time job of learning to write prose. 

            by
any standards we were still very poor and i still made such small economies as
saying that i had been asked out for lunch and then spending two hours walking
in the luxembourg gardens and coming back to describe the marvellous lunch to
my wife. 

            when
you are twenty-five and are a natural heavyweight, missing a meal makes you
very hungry. but it also sharpens all of your perceptions, and i found that
many of the people i wrote about had very strong appetites and a great taste
and desire for food, and most of them were looking forward to having a drink. 

            at
the negre de toulouse we drank the good cahors wine from the quarter, the half
or the full carafe, usually diluting it about one-third with water. at home,
over the sawmill, we had a corsican wine that had great authority and a low
price. it was a very corsican wine and you could diute it by half with water
and still receive its message. in paris, then, you could live very well on
almost nothing and by skipping meals occasionally and never buying any new
clothes, you could save and have luxuries. 

            coming
back from the select now i had sheered off at the sight of harold stearns who i
knew would want to talk horses, those animals i was thinking of righteously and
light-heartedly as the beasts that i had just forsworn. full of my evening
virtue i passed the collection of inmates at the rotonde and, scorning vice and
the collective instinct, crossed the boulevard to the dome. the dome was
crowded too, but there were people there who had worked. 

            there
were models who had worked and there were painters who had worked until the
light was gone and there were writers who had finished a day's work for better
or for worse, and there were drinkers and characters, some of whom i knew and
some that were only decoration. 

            i
went over and sat down at a table with pascin and two models who were sisters. 

            Pascin
had waved to me while i had stood on the sidewalk on the rue delambre side
wondering whether to stop and have a drink or not. pascin was a very good
painter and he was drunk; steady, purposefully drunk and making good sense. the
two models were young and pretty. one was very dark, small, beautifully built
with a falsely fragile depravity. the other was childlike and dull but very pretty
in a perishable childish way. she was not as well built as her sister, but
neither was anyone else that spring. 

            'the
good and the bad sisters,' pascin said. 'i have money. what will you drink?' 

            'une
demi-blonde,'  i said to the waiter. 

            'have
a whisky. i have money.' 

            'i
like beer.' 

            'if
you really liked beer, you'd be at lipp's. i suppose you've been working.' 

            'yes.'

            'it
goes?' 

            'i
hope so.' 

            'good.
i'm glad. and everything still tastes good?' 

            'yes.'

            'how
old are you?' 

            'twenty-five.'

            'do
you want to bang her?' he looked towards the dark sister and smiled. 'she needs
it.' 

            'you
probably banged her enough today.' 

            she
smiled at me with her lips open. 'he's wicked,' she said. 'but he's nice.' 

            'you
can take her over to the studio.' 

            'don't
make piggishness,' the blonde sister said. 

            'who
spoke to you?' pascin asked her. 

            'nobody.
but i said it.' 

            'let's
be comfortable,' pascin said. 'the serious young writer and the friendly wise
old painter and the two beautiful young girls with all of life before them.' 

            we
sat there and the girls sipped at their drinks and pascin drank another fine
al'eau  and i drank the beer; but no
one was comfortable except pascin. the dark girl was restless and she sat on
display turning her profile and letting the light strike the concave planes of her
face and showing me her breasts under the hold of the black sweater. her hair
was cropped short and was sleek and dark as an oriental's. 

            'you've
posed all day,' pascin said to her. 'do you have to model that sweater now at
the cafe?' 

            'it
pleases me,' she said. 

            'you
look like a javanese toy,' he said. 

            'not
the eyes,' she said. 'it's more complicated than that.' 

            'you
look like a poor perverted little poupee.' 

            'perhaps,'
she said. 'but alive. that's more than you.' 

            'we'll
see about that.' 

            'good,'
she said. 'i like proofs.' 

            'you
didn't have any today?' 

            'oh
that,' she said and turned to catch the last evening light on her face. 'you
were just excited about your work. he's in love with canvases,' she said to me.
'there always some kind of dirtiness.' 

            'you
want me to paint you and pay you and bang you to keep my head clear, and be in
love with you too,' pascin said. 'you poor little doll.' 

            'you
like me, don't you, monsieur?' she asked me. 

            'very
much.' 

            'but
you're too big,' she said sadly. 

            'everyone
is the same size in bed.' 

            'it's
not true,' her sister said. 'and i'm tired of this talk.' 

            'look,'
pascin said. 'if you think i'm in love with canvases, i'll paint you tomorrow
in water colours.' 

            'when
do we eat?' her sister asked. 'and where?' 

            'will
you eat with us?' the dark girl asked. 

            'no.
i go to eat with my legitime.'  that was what they said then. now they say 'my
reguliere'. 

            'you
have to go?' 

            'have
to and want to.' 

            'go
on, then,' pascin said. 'and don't fall in love with typewriting paper.' 

            'if
i do, i'll write with a pencil.' 

            'water
colours tomorrow,' he said. 'all right, my children, i will drink another and
then we eat where you wish.' 

            'chez
viking,' the dark girl said. 

            'me
too,' her sister urged. 

            'all
right,' pascin agreed. 'good night, jeune homme.  sleep well.' 

            'you
too.' 

            'they
keep me awake,' he said. 'i never sleep.' 

            'sleep
tonight.' 

            'after
chez les vikings?' he grinned with his hat on the back of his head. he looked
more like a broadway character of the nineties than the lovely painter that he
was, and afterwards, when he had hanged himself, i liked to remember him as he
was that night at the dome. they say the seeds of what we will do are in all of
us, but it always seemed to me that in those who make jokes in life the seeds
are covered with better soil and with a higher grade of manure.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–12–

Ezra
Pound and His Bel Esprit

 

 

            Ezra
Pound was always a good friend and he was always doing things for people. the
studio where he lived with his wife dorothy on the rue notre-dame-des-champs
was as poor as gertrude stein's studio was rich. it had very good light and was
heated by a stove and it had paintings by japanese artists that ezra knew. they
were all noblemen where they came from and wore their hair cut long. their hair
glistened black and swung forward when they bowed and i was very impressed by
them but i did not like their paintings. i did not understand them but they did
not have any mystery, and when i understood them they meant nothing to me. i
was sorry about this but there was nothing i could do about it. 

            Dorothy’s
paintings i liked very much and i thought dorothy was very beautiful and built
wonderfully. i also liked the head of ezra by gaudier-brzeska and i liked all
of the photographs of this sculptor's work that ezra showed me and that were in
ezra's book about him. ezra also liked picabia's painting but i thought then
that it was worthless. i also disliked wyndham lewis's painting which ezra
liked very much. he liked the works of his friends, which is beautiful as
loyalty but can be disastrous as judgment. 

            We,
never argued about these things because i kept my mouth shut about things i did
not like. if a man liked his friends' painting or writing, i thought it was
probably like those people who like their families, and it was not polite to
criticize them. sometimes you can go quite a long time before you criticize
families, your own or those by marriage, but it is easier with bad painters
because they do not do terrible things and make intimate harm as families can
do. with bad painters all you need to do is not look at them. but even when you
have learned not to look at families nor listen to them and have learned not to
answer letters, families have many ways of being dangerous. ezra was kinder and
more christian about people than i was. his own writing, when he would hit it
right, was so perfect, and he was so sincere in his mistakes and so enamoured
of his errors, and so kind to people that i always thought of him as a sort of
saint. he was also irascible but so perhaps have been many saints. 

            ezra
wanted me to teach him to box and it was while we were sparring late one
afternoon in his studio that i first met wyndham lewis. ezra had not been
boxing very long and i was embarrassed at having him work in front of anyone he
knew, and i tried to make him look as good as possible. but it was not very
good because he knew how to fence and i was still working to make his left into
his boxing hand and move his left foot forward always and bring his right foot
up parallel with it. it was just basic moves. i was never able to teach him to
throw a left hook and to teach him to shorten his right was something for the
future. 

            wyndham
lewis wore a wide black hat, like a character in the quarter, and was dressed
like someone out of la boheme.  he
had a face that reminded me of a frog, not a bullfrog but just any frog, and
paris was too big a puddle for him. at that time we believed that any writer or
painter could wear any clothes he owned and there was no official uniform for
the artist; but lewis wore the uniform of a pre-war artist. it was embarrassing
to see him and he watched superciliously while i slipped ezra's left leads or
blocked them with an open right glove. 

            i
wanted us to stop but lewis insisted we go on, and i could see that, knowing
nothing about what was going on, he was waiting, hoping to see ezra hurt.
nothing happened. i never countered but kept ezra moving after me, sticking out
his left hand and throwing a few right hands, and then said we were through and
washed down with a pitcher of water and towelled off and put on my sweatshirt. 

            we
had a drink of something and i listened while ezra and lewis talked about
people in london and paris. i watched lewis carefully without seeming to look
at him, as you do when you are boxing, and i do not think i had ever seen a
nastier-looking man. some people show evil as a great racehorse shows breeding.
they have the dignity of a hard chancre.  lewis did not show evil; he just looked nasty.

            walking
home i tried to think what he reminded me of and there were various things.
they were all medical except toe-jam and that was a slang word. i tried to
break his face down and describe it but i could only get the eyes. under the
black hat, when i had first seen them, the eyes had been those of an
unsuccessful rapist. 

            'I
met the nastiest man i've ever seen today,' i told my wife. 'tatie, don't tell
me about him,' she said. 'please don't tell me about him. we're just going to
have dinner.' 

            About
a week afterwards i met miss stein and told her i'd met wyndham lewis and asked
her if she had ever met him. 'i call him "the measuring worm",' she
said. 'he comes over from london and he sees a good picture and takes a pencil
out of his pocket and you watch him measuring it on the pencil with his thumb.
sighting on it and measuring it and seeing exactly how it is done. then he goes
back to london and does it and it doesn't come out right. he's missed what it's
all about.' 

            so
i thought of him as the measuring worm. it was a kinder and more christian term
than what i had thought about him myself. later i tried to like him and to be
friends with him as i did with nearly all of ezra's friends when he explained
them to me. 

            but
this was how he seemed to me on the first day i ever met him in ezra's studio. 

            ezra
was the most generous writer i have ever known and the most disinterested. 

            he
helped poets, painters, sculptors and prose writers that he believed in and he
would help anyone whether he believed in them or not if they were in trouble.
he worried about everyone and in the time when i first knew him he was most
worried about t. s. eliot who, ezra told me, had to work in a bank in london
and so had insufficient time and bad hours to function as a poet. 

            ezra
founded something called bel esprit with miss natalie barney who was a rich
american woman and a patroness of the arts. miss barney had been a friend of
remy de gourmont who was before my time and she had a salon at her house on
regular dates and a small greek temple in her garden. many american and french
women with money enough had salons and i figured very early that they were
excellent places for me to stay away from, but miss barney, i believe, was the
only one that had a small greek temple in her garden. 

            ezra
showed me the brochure for bel esprit and miss barney had allowed him to use
the small greek temple on the brochure. the idea of bel esprit was that we
would all contribute a part of whatever we earned to provide a fund to get mr.
eliot out of the bank so he would have money to write poetry. this seemed like
a good idea to me and after we had got mr. eliot out of the bank ezra figured
we would go right straight along and fix up everybody. 

            i
mixed things up a little by always referring to eliot as major eliot,
pretending to confuse him with major douglas, an economist about whose ideas
ezra was very enthusiastic. but ezra understood that my heart was in the right
place and that i was full of bel esprit even though it would annoy ezra when i
would solicit funds from my friends to get major eliot out of the bank and
someone would say what was a major doing in a bank anyway and if he had been
axed by the military establishment did he not have a pension or at least some
gratuity? 

            in
such cases i would explain to my friends that this was all beside the point.
either you had bel esprit or you did not have it. if you had it you would
subscribe to get the major out of the bank. if you didn't it was too bad.
didn't they understand the significance of the small greek temple? no? i
thought so. too bad, mac. keep your money. we wouldn't touch it. 

            as
a member of bel esprit i campaigned energetically and my happiest dreams in
those days were of seeing the major stride out of the bank a free man. i cannot
remember how bel esprit finally cracked up but i think it had something to do
with the publication of the waste land  which won the major the dial  award, and not long after a lady of title
backed a review for eliot called the criterion  and ezra and i did not have to worry about him
any more. the small greek temple is, i believe, still in the garden. it was
always a disappointment to me that we had not been able to get the major out of
the bank by bel esprit alone, as in my dreams i had pictured him as coming,
perhaps, to live in the small greek temple and that maybe i could go with ezra
when we would drop in to crown him with laurel. i knew where there was fine
laurel that i could gather, riding out on my bicycle to get it, and i thought
we could crown him any time he felt lonesome or any time ezra had gone over the
manuscript or the proofs of another big poem like the waste land.  the whole thing turned out badly for me
morally, as so many things have, because the money that i had earmarked for
getting the major out of the bank i took out to enghien and bet on jumping
horses that raced under the influence of stimulants. at two meetings the
stimulated horses that i was backing outraced the unstimulated or
insufficiently stimulated beasts, except for one race in which our fancy had
been overstimulated to such a point that before the start he threw his jockey
and breaking away completed a full circuit of the steeplechase course jumping
beautifully by himself the way one can sometimes jump in dreams. caught up and
remounted he started the race and figured honourably, as the french racing
phrase has it, but was out of the money. 

            i
would have been happier if the amount of the wager had gone to bel esprit which
was no longer existent. but i comforted myself that with those wagers which had
prospered i could have contributed much more to bel esprit than was my original
intention.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–13–

A Strange Enough
Ending

 

 

            The
way it ended with gertrude stein was strange enough. we had become very good
friends and i had done a number of practical things for her such as getting her
long book started as a serial with ford and helping type the manuscript and
reading her proof and we were getting to be better friends than i could ever
wish to be. there is not much future in men being friends with great women
although it can be pleasant enough before it gets better or worse, and there is
usually even less future with truly ambitious women writers. one time when i
gave the excuse for not having stopped in at 27 rue de fleurus for some time
that i did not know whether miss stein would be at home, she said, 'but
hemingway, you have the run of the place. don't you know that? i mean it truly.
come in any time and the maidservant' - she used her name but i have forgotten
it - 'will look after you and you must make yourself at home until i come.' 

            i
did not abuse this but sometimes i would stop in and the maidservant would give
me a drink and i would look at the pictures and if miss stein did not turn up i
would thank the maidservant and leave a message and go away. miss stein and a
companion were getting ready to go south in miss stein's car and on this day
miss stein had asked me to come by in the forenoon to say goodbye. she had
asked us to come and visit, hadley and i staying at an hotel, but hadley and i
had other plans and other places where we wanted to go. naturally you say
nothing about this, but you can still hope to go and then it is impossible. i
knew a little about the system of not visiting people. i had to learn it. much
later picasso told me that he always promised the rich to come when they asked
him because it made them so happy and then something would happen and he would
be unable to appear. but that had nothing to do with miss stein and he said it
about other people. 

            it
was a lovely spring day and i walked down from the place de l'observatoire
through the little luxembourg. the horse-chestnut trees were in blossom and
there were many children playing on the gravelled walks with their nurses
sitting on the benches, and i saw wood-pigeons in the trees and heard others
that i could not see. 

            the
maidservant opened the door before i rang and told me to come in and to wait. 

            miss
stein would be down at any moment. it was before noon but the maidservant
poured me a glass of eau-de-vie,  put it in my hand and winked happily. the
colourless alcohol felt good on my tongue and it was still in my mouth when i
heard someone speaking to miss stein as i had never heard one person speak to
another; never, anywhere, ever. 

            then
miss stein's voice came pleading and begging, saying, 'don't, pussy. don't. 

            don't,
please don't. i'll do anything, pussy, but please don't do it. please don't.
please don't, pussy.' 

            I
swallowed the drink and put the glass down on the table and started for the door.

            The
maidservant shook her finger at me and whispered, 'don't go. She’ll be right
down.' 

            'I
have to go,' i said and tried not to hear any more as i left but it was still
going on and the only way i could not hear it was to be gone. it was bad to hear
and the answers were worse. 

            In
the courtyard i said to the maidservant, 'please say i came to the courtyard
and met you. That i could not wait because a friend is sick. Say bon voyage  for me. i will write.' 'c'est entendu,  monsieur. What a shame you cannot wait.'
'yes,' i said. 'what a shame.' 

            That
was the way it finished for me, stupidly enough, although i still did the small
jobs, made the necessary appearances, brought people that were asked for and
waited dismissal with most of the other men friends when that epoch came and
the new friends moved in. it was sad to see new worthless pictures hung in with
the great pictures but it made no difference any more. not to me it didn't. she
quarrelled with nearly all of us that were fond of her except juan gris and she
couldn't quarrel with him because he was dead. i am not sure that he would have
cared because he was past caring and it showed in his paintings. 

            Finally
she even quarrelled with the new friends but none of us followed it any more.
she got to look like a roman emperor and that was fine if you liked your women
to look like roman emperors. but picasso had painted her, and i could remember
her when she looked like a woman from friuli. 

            In
the end everyone, or not quite everyone, made friends again in order not to be
stuffy or righteous. i did too. but i could never make friends again truly,
neither in my heart nor in my head. when you cannot make friends any more in
your head is the worst. but it was more complicated than that.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–14–

The
Man Who Was Marked for Death

 

 

            The
afternoon i met Ernest Walsh, the poet, in ezra's studio, he was with two girls
in long mink coats and there was a long, shiny, hired car from claridge's
outside in the street with a uniformed chauffeur. the girls were blondes and
they had crossed on the same ship with walsh. the ship had arrived the day
before and he had brought them with him to visit ezra. 

            ernest
walsh was dark, intense, faultlessly irish, poetic and clearly marked for death
as a character is marked for death in a motion picture. he was talking to ezra
and i talked with the girls, who asked me if i had read mr walsh's poems. i had
not and one of them brought out a green-covered copy of harriet monroe's poetry,
a. 

            Magazine
of verse and showed me poems by walsh in it. 

            'he
gets twelve hundred dollars apiece,' she said. 

            'for
each poem,' the other girl said. 

            my
recollection was that i received twelve dollars a page, if that, from the same
magazine. 'he must be a very great poet,' i said. 

            'it's
more than eddie guest gets,' the first girl told me. 

            'it's
more than who's that other poet gets. you know.' 

            'kipling,'
her friend said. 

            'it's
more than anybody gets ever,' the first girl said. 

            'are
you staying in paris very long?' i asked them. 

            'well
no. not really. we're with a group of friends.' 

            'we
came over on this boat, you know. but there wasn't anyone on it really. mr. 

            walsh
was on it of course.' 

            'doesn't
he play cards?' i asked. 

            she
looked at me in a disappointed but understanding way. 

            'no.
he doesn't have to. not writing poetry the way he can write it.' 

            'what
ship are you going back on?' 

            'well
that depends. it depends on the boats and on a lot of things. are you going
back?' 

            'no.
i'm getting by all right.' 

            'this
is sort of the poor quarter over here, isn't it?' 

            'yes.
but it's pretty good. i work the cafes and i'm out at the track.' 

            'can
you go out to the track in those clothes?' 

            'no.
this is my cafe outfit.' 

            'it's
kind of cute,' one of the girls said. 'i'd like to see some of that cafe life.
wouldn't you, dear?' 

            'i
would,' the other girl said. i wrote their names down in my address book and
promised to call them at claridge's. they were nice girls and i said goodbye to
them and to walsh and to ezra. walsh was still talking to ezra with great
intensity. 

            'don't
forget,' the taller one of the girls said. 

            'how
could i?' i told her and shook hands with them both again. 

            the
next i heard from ezra about walsh was that he had been bailed out of
claridge's by some lady admirers of poetry and of young poets who were marked
for death, and the next thing, some time after that, was that he had financial
backing from another source and was going to start a new magazine in the
quarter as a co-editor. 

            at
the time the dial,  an american
literary magazine edited by scofield thayer, gave an annual award of, i
believe, a thousand dollars for excellence in the practice of letters by a
contributor. this was a huge sum for any straight writer to receive in those
days, in addition to the prestige, and the award had gone to various people,
all deserving, naturally. two people, then, could live comfortably and well in
europe on five dollars a day and could travel. 

            this
quarterly, of which walsh was one of the editors, was alleged to be going to
award a very substantial sum to the contributor whose work should be judged the
best at the end of the first four issues. 

            if
the news was passed around by gossip or rumour, or if it was a matter of
personal confidence, cannot be said. let us hope and believe always that it was
completely honourable in every way. certainly nothing could ever be said or
imputed against walsh's co-editor. 

            it
was not long after i heard rumours of this alleged award that walsh asked me to
lunch one day at a restaurant that was the best and the most expensive in the
boulevard st-michel quarter and after the oysters, expensive flat faintly
coppery marennes,  not the
familiar, deep, inexpensive portugaises,  and a bottle of pouilly-fuisse, began to lead
up to it delicately. he appeared to be conning me as he had conned the shills
from the boat - if they were shills and if he had conned them, of course - and
when he asked me if i would like another dozen of the flat oysters, as he
called them, i said i would like them very much. he did not bother to look
marked for death with me and this was a relief. he knew i knew he had the con,
not the kind you con with but the kind you died of then and how bad it was, and
he did not bother to have to cough, and i was grateful for this at the table. i
was wondering if he ate the flat oysters in the same way the whores in kansas
city, who were marked for death and practically everything else, always wished
to swallow semen as a sovereign remedy against the con; but i did not ask him.
i began my second dozen of the flat oysters, picking them from their bed of
crushed ice on the silver plate, watching their unbelievably delicate brown
edges react and cringe as i squeezed lemon juice on them and separated the
holding muscle from the shell and lifted them to chew them carefully. 

            'ezra's
a great, great poet,' walsh said, looking at me with his own dark poet's eyes. 

            'yes,'
i said. 'and a fine man.' 

            'noble,'
walsh said. 'truly noble.' we ate and drank in silence as a tribute to ezra's
nobility. i missed ezra and wished he were there. he could not afford marennes
 either. 

            'joyce
is great,' walsh said. 'great, great.' 

            'great,'
i said. 'and a good friend.' we had become friends in his wonderful period
after the finishing of ulysses  and before starting what was called for a long
time workin progress.  i thought
of joyce and remembered many things. 

            'i
wish his eyes were better,' walsh said. 

            'so
does he,' i said. 

            'it
is the tragedy of our time,' walsh told me. 

            'everybody
has something wrong with them,' i said, trying to cheer up the lunch. 

            'you
haven't.' he gave me all his charm and more, and then he marked himself for
death. 

            'you
mean i am not marked for death?' i asked. i could not help it. 

            'no.
you're marked for life.' he capitalized the word. 

            'give
me time,' i said. 

            he
wanted a good steak, rare, and i ordered two tournedos  with sauce bearnaise. i figured the butter
would be good for him. 

            'what
about a red wine?' he asked. the sommelier  came and i ordered a chateauneuf du pape. i
would walk it off afterwards along the quais. he could sleep it off, or do what
he wanted to. i might take mine some place, i thought. 

            it
came as we finished the steak and french-fried potatoes and were two-thirds
through the chateauneuf du pape which is not a luncheon wine. 

            'there's
no use beating around the bush,' he said. 'you know you're to get the award,
don't you?' 

            'am
i?' i said. 'why?' 

            'you're
to get it,' he said. he started to talk about my writing and i stopped
listening. it made me feel sick for people to talk about my writing to my face,
and i looked at him and his marked-for-death look and i thought, you con man
conning me with your con. i've seen a battalion in the dust on the road, a
third of them for" death or worse and no special marks on them, the dust
for all, and you and your marked-for-death look, you con man, making a living
out of your death. now you will con me. con not, that thou be not conned. death
was not conning with him. it was coming all right. 

            'I
don't think i deserve it, Ernest,' i said, enjoying using my own name, that i
hated, to him. 'Besides, Ernest, it would not be ethical, Ernest.' 

            'It’s
strange we have the same name, isn't it?' 

            'Yes,
Ernest,' i said. 'it's a name we must both live up to. you see what i mean,
don't you, Ernest?' 

            'Yes,
Ernest,' he said. he gave me complete, sad irish understanding and the charm. 

            so
i was always very nice to him and to his magazine and when he had his
haemorrhages and left paris, asking me to see his magazine through the
printers, who did not read english, i did that. i had seen one of the
haemorrhages, it was very legitimate, and i knew that he would die all right,
and it pleased me at that time, which was a difficult time in my life, to be
extremely nice to him, as it pleased me to call him ernest. also, i liked and
admired his co-editor. she had not promised me any award. 

            she
only wished to build a good magazine and pay her contributors well. 

            one
day, much later, i met joyce who was walking along the boulevard st-germain
after having been to a matinee alone. he liked to listen to the actors,
although he could not see them. he asked me to have a drink with him and we
went to the deux-magots and ordered dry sherry although you will always read
that he drank only swiss white wine. 

            'how
about walsh?' joyce said. 

            'a
such and such alive is a such and such dead,' i said. 

            'did
he promise you that award?' joyce asked. 

            'yes.'

            'i
thought so,' joyce said. 

            'did
he promise it to you?' 

            'yes,'
joyce said. after a time he asked, 'do you think he promised it to pound?' 

            'i
don't know.' 

            'best
not to ask him,' joyce said. we left it at that. i told joyce of my first
meeting with him in ezra's studio with the girls in the long fur coats and it
made him happy to hear the story.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–15–

Evan
Shipman at the Lilas

 

 

            From
the day i had found sylvia beach's library i had read all of turgenev, what had
been published in english of gogol, the constance garnett translations of
tolstoi and the english translations of chehov. in toronto, before we had ever
come to paris, i had been told katherine mansfield was a good short-story
writer, even a great short-story writer, but trying to read her after chehov
was like hearing the carefully artificial tales of a young old-maid compared to
those of an articulate and knowing physician who was a good and simple writer.
mansfield was like near-beer. it was better to drink water. but chehov was not
water except for the clarity. there were some stories that seemed to be only
journalism. but there were wonderful ones too. 

            In
dostoevsky there were things unbelievable and not to be believed, but some so
true they changed you as you read them; frailty and madness, wickedness and
saintliness, and the insanity of gambling were there to know as you knew the
landscape and the roads in turgenev, and the movement of troops, the terrain
and the officers and the men and the fighting in tolstoi. tolstoi made the
writing of stephen crane on the civil war seem like the brilliant imagining of
a sick boy who had never seen war but had only read the battles and chronicles
and seen the brady photographs that i had read and seen at my grandparents'
house. until i read the chartreuse de parme  by stendhal i had never read of war as it was
except in tolstoi, and the wonderful waterloo account by stendhal was an
accidental piece in a book that had much dullness. to have come on all this new
world of writing, with time to read in a city like paris where there was a way
of living well and working, no matter how poor you were, was like having a
great treasure given to you. you could take your treasure with you when you
travelled too, and in the mountains where we lived in switzerland and italy,
until we found schruns in the high valley in the vorarlberg in austria, there were
always the books, so that you lived in the new worm you had found, the snow and
the forests and the glaciers and their winter problems and your high shelter in
the hotel taube in the village in the daytime, and at night you could live in
the other wonderful world the russian writers were giving you. at first there
were the russians; then there were all the others. but for a long time there
were the russians. 

            i
remember asking ezra once when we had walked home from playing tennis out on
the boulevard arago, and he had asked me into his studio for a drink, what he
really thought about dostoevsky. 

            'to
tell you the truth, hem,' ezra said, 'i've never read the rooshians.' 

            it
was a straight answer and ezra had never given me any other kind verbally, but
i felt very bad because here was the man i liked and trusted the most as a
critic then, the man who believed in the mot juste —  the one and only correct word to use - the man
who had taught me to distrust adjectives as i would later learn to distrust
certain people in certain situations; and i wanted his opinion on a man who
almost never used the mot juste  and yet had made his people come alive at
times, as almost no one else did. 

            'keep
to the french,' ezra said. 'you've plenty to learn there.' 

            'i
know it,' i said. 'i've plenty to learn everywhere.' later after leaving ezra's
studio and walking along the street to the sawmill, looking down the high-sided
street to the opening at the end where the bare trees showed and behind them
the far facade of the bal bullier across the width of the boulevard st-michel,
i opened the gate and went in past the fresh-sawn lumber and left my racket in
its press beside the stairs that led to the top floor of the pavilion.  i called up the stairs but there was no one
home. 

            'madame
has gone out and the bonne  and
the baby too,' the wife of the sawmill owner told me. she was a difficult
woman, over-plump, with brassy hair, and i thanked her. 

            'there
was a young man to see you,' she said, using the term jeune homme
instead of monsieur. 'he said he would be at the lilas.' 

            'thank
you very much,' i said. 'if madame comes in, please tell her i am at the
lilas.' 

            'she
went out with friends,' the wife said, and gathering her purple dressing-gown
about her went on high heels into the doorway of her own domaine  without closing the door. 

            i
walked down the street between the high, stained and streaked white houses and
turned to the right at the open, sunny end and went into the sun-striped dusk
of the lilas. 

            there
was no one there i knew and i went outside onto the terrace and found evan
shipman waiting. he was a fine poet and he knew and cared about horses, writing
and painting. he rose and i saw him tall and pale and thin, his white shirt
dirty and worn at the collar, his tie carefully knotted, his worn and wrinkled
grey suit, his fingers stained darker than his hair, his nails dirty and his
loving, deprecatory smile that he held tightly not to show his bad teeth. 

            'it's
good to see you, hem,' he said. 

            'how
are you, evan?' i asked. 

            'a
little down,' he said. 'i think i have the "mazeppa" licked though.
have you been going well?' 

            'i
hope so,' i said. 'i was out playing tennis with ezra when you came by.' 

            'is
ezra well?' 

            'very.'

            'i'm
so glad. hem, you know i don't think that owner's wife where you live likes me.

            she
wouldn't let me wait upstairs for you.' 

            'i'll
tell her,' i said. 

            'don't
bother. i can always wait here. it's very pleasant in the sun now, isn't it?' 

            'it's
fall now,' i said. 'i don't think you dress warmly enough.' 

            'it's
only cool in the evening,' evan said. 'i'll wear my coat.' 

            'do
you know where it is?' 

            'no.
but it's somewhere safe.' 

            'how
do you know?' 

            'because
i left the poem in it.' he laughed heartily, holding his lips tightly over the
teeth. 'have a whisky with me, please, hem.' 

            'all
right.' 

            'jean,'
evan got up and called the waiter. 'two whiskies, please.' 

            jean
brought the bottle and the glasses and two ten-franc saucers with the syphon.
he used no measuring glass and poured the whisky until the glasses were more
than three-quarters full. jean loved evan who often went out and worked with
him at his garden in montrouge, out beyond the porte d'orleans, on jean's day
off. 

            'you
mustn't exaggerate,' evan said to the tall old waiter. 

            'they
are two whiskies, aren't they?' the waiter asked. 

            we
added water and evan said, 'take the first sip very carefully, hem. properly
handled, they will hold us for some time.' 

            'are
you taking any care of yourself?' i asked. 

            'yes,
truly, hem. let's talk about something else, should we?' 

            there
was no one sitting on the terrace and the whisky was warming us both, although
i was better dressed for the fall than evan as i wore a sweatshirt for
underwear and then a shirt and a blue wool french sailor's sweater over the
shirt. 

            'i've
been wondering about dostoevsky,' i said. 'how can a man write so badly, so
unbelievably badly, and make you feel so deeply?' 

            'it
can't be the translation,' evan said. 'she makes the tolstoi come out well
written.' 

            'i
know. i remember how many times i tried to read war and peace  until i got the constance garnett
translation.' 

            'they
say it can be improved on,' evan'said. 'i'm sure it can although i don't know
russian. but we both know translations. but it comes out as a hell of a novel,
the greatest i suppose, and you can read it over and over.' 

            'i
know,' i said. 'but you can't read dostoevsky over and over. i had crime
andpunishment  on a trip when we ran
out of books down at schruns, and i couldn't read it again when we had nothing
to read. i read the austrian papers and studied german until we found some
trollope in tauchnitz.' 

            'god
bless tauchnitz,' evan said. the whisky had lost its burning quality and was
now, when water was added, simply much too strong. 

            'dostoevsky
was a shit, hem,' evan went on. 'he was best on shits and saints. he makes
wonderful saints. it's a shame we can't re-read him.' 

            'i'm
going to try the brothers  again.
it was probably my fault.' 

            'you
can read some of it again. most of it. but then it will start to make you
angry, no matter how great it is.' 

            'well,
we were lucky to have had it to read the first time and maybe there will be a
better translation.' 

            'but
don't let it tempt you, hem.' 

            'i
won't. i'm trying to do it so it will make it without you knowing it, and so
the more you read it, the more there will be.' 

            well,
i'm backing you in jean's whisky,' evan said. 

            'he'll
get in trouble doing that,' i said. 

            'he's
in trouble already,' evan said. 

            'how?'

            'they're
changing the management,' evan said. 'the new owners want to have a different
clientele that will spend some money and they are going to put in an american
bar. the waiters are going to be in white jackets, hem, and they have been
ordered to be ready to shave off their moustaches.' 

            'they
can't do that to andre and jean.' 

            'they
shouldn't be able to, but they will.' 

            'jean
has had a moustache all his life. that's a dragoon's moustache. he served in a
cavalry regiment.' 

            'he's
going to have to cut it off.' 

            i
drank the last of the whisky. 

            'another
whisky, monsieur?' jean asked. 'a whisky, monsieur shipman?' his heavy drooping
moustache was a part of his thin, kind face, and the bald top of his head
glistened under the strands of hair that were slicked across it. 'don't do it,
jean,' i said. 

            'don't
take a chance.' 'there is no chance,' he said, softly to us. 'there is much
confusion. many are leaving. entendu,  messeurs,' he said aloud. he went into the
cafe and came out carrying the bottle of whisky, two large glasses, two
ten-franc gold-rimmed saucers and a seltzer bottle. 'no, jean,' i said. 

            he
put the glasses down on the saucers and filled them almost to the brim with
whisky and took the remains of the bottle back into the cafe. evan and i
squirted a little seltzer into the glasses. 

            'it
was a good thing dostoevsky didn't know jean,' evan said. 'he might have died
of drink.' 'what are we going to do with these?' 'drink them," evans said.
'it's a protest. 

            it's
direct action.' on the following monday when i went to the lilas to work in the
morning, andre served me a bovril,  which is a cup of beef extract and water. he
was short and blond and where his stubby moustache had been, his lip was as
bare as a priest's. he was wearing a white american barman's coat. 'and jean?' 

            'he
won't be in until tomorrow.' 'how is he?' 

            'it
took him longer to reconcile himself. he was in a heavy cavalry regiment
throughout the war. he had the croix de guerre and the medaille militaire.' 

            'i
did not know he was so badly wounded.' 'no. he was wounded of course but it was
the other sort of medaille militaire he has. for gallantry.' 'tell him i asked
for him.' 

            'of
course,' andre said. 'i hope it will not take him too long to reconcile
himself.' 

            'please
give him mr shipman's greeting too.' 'mr shipman is with him,' andre said. 

            'they
are gardening together.'

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–16–

An Agent of Evil

 

 

            The
last thing ezra said to me before he left the rue notre-dame-des-champs to go
to rapallo was, 'hem, i want you to keep this jar of opium and give it to
dunning only when he needs it.' 

            It
was a large cold-cream jar and when i unscrewed the top the content was dark
and sticky and it had the smell of very raw opium. ezra had bought it from an
indian chief, he said, on the avenue de l'opera near the boulevard des italiens
and it had been very expensive. i thought it must have come from the old hole
in the wall bar which was a hangout for deserters and for dope peddlers during
and after the first war. 

            The
hole in the wall was a very narrow bar with a red-painted facade, little more
than a passageway, on the rue des italiens. at one time it had a rear exit into
the sewers of paris from which you were supposed to be able to reach the
catacombs. dunning was ralph cheever dunning, a poet who smoked opium and
forgot to eat. when he was smoking too much he could only drink milk and he
wrote in terza-rima  which
endeared him to ezra who also found fine qualities in his poetry. he lived in
the same courtyard where ezra had his studio and ezra had called me in to help
him when dunning was dying a few weeks before ezra was to leave paris. 

            'dunning
is dying,' ezra's message said. 'please come at once.' 

            dunning
looked like a skeleton as he lay on the mattress and he would certainly have
eventually died of malnutrition but i finally convinced ezra that few people
ever died while speaking in well-rounded phrases and that i had never known any
man to die while speaking in terza-rima  and that i doubted even if dante could do it.
ezra said he was not talking in terza-rima  and i said that perhaps it only sounded like terza-rima
because i had been asleep when he had sent for me. finally after a night with
dunning waiting for death to come, the matter was put in the hands of a
physician and dunning was taken to a private clinic to be disintoxicated. ezra
guaranteed his bills and enlisted the aid of i do not know which lovers of
poetry on dunning's behalf. only the delivery of the opium in any true
emergency was left to me. it was a sacred charge coming from ezra and i only
hoped i could live up to it and determine the state of a true emergency. 

            it
came when ezra's concierge arrived one sunday morning at the sawmill yard and
shouted up to the open window where i was studying the racing form, 'mtinsieurdunning
est monte sur le toit et refuse categoriquement de descendre.' 

            dunning
having climbed to the roof of the studio and refusing categorically to come
down seemed a valid emergency and i found the opium jar and walked up the
street with the concierge who was a small and intense woman very excited by the
situation. 

            'monsieur
has what is needed?' she asked me. 

            'absolutely,'
i said. 'there will be no difficulty.' 

            'monsieur
pound thinks of everything,' she said. 'he is kindness personified.' 

            'he
is indeed,' i said. 'and i miss him every day.' 

            'let
us hope that monsieur dunning will be reasonable.' 

            'i
have what it takes,' i assured her. 

            when
we reached the courtyard where the studios were the concierge said, 'he's come
down.' 

            'he
must have known i was coming,' i said. 

            i
climbed the outside stairway that led to dunning's place and knocked. he opened
the door. he was gaunt and seemed unusually tall. 

            'ezra
asked me to bring you this,' i said and handed him the jar. 'he said you would
know what it was.' 

            he
took the jar and looked at it. then he threw it at me. it struck me on the
chest or the shoulder and rolled down the stairs. 

            'you
son of a bitch,' he said. 'you bastard.' 

            'ezra
said you might need it,' i said. he countered that by throwing a milk bottle. 

            'you
are sure you don't need it?' i asked. 

            he
threw another milk botde. i retreated and he hit me with yet another milk
bottle in the back. then he shut the door. 

            i
picked up the jar, which was only slightly cracked, and put it in my pocket. 

            'he
did not seem to want the gift of monsieur pound,' i said to the concierge. 

            'perhaps
he will be tranquil now,' she said. 

            'perhaps
he has some of his own,' i said. 

            'poor
monsieur dunning,' she said. 

            the
lovers of poetry that ezra had organized rallied to dunning's aid again
eventually. my own intervention and that of the concierge had been
unsuccessful. the jar of alleged opium which had been cracked i stored wrapped
in waxed paper and carefully tied in one of an old pair of riding boots. when evan
shipman and i were removing my personal effects from that apartment some years
later the boots were still there but the jar was gone. i do not know why
dunning threw the milk bottles at me unless he remembered my lack of credulity
the night of his first dying, or whether it was only an innate dislike of my
personality. but i remember the happiness that the phrase 'monsieur dunning,
est monte sur le toit et refuse categoriquement dedescendre'  gave to evan shipman. he believed there was
something symbolic about it. 

            i
would not know. perhaps dunning took me for an agent of evil or of the police.
i only know that ezra tried to be kind to dunning as he was kind to so many
people and i always hoped dunning was as fine a poet as ezra believed him to
be. for a poet he threw a very accurate milk bottle. but ezra, who was a very
great poet, played a good game of tennis too. evan shipman, who was a very fine
poet and who truly did not care if his poems were ever published, felt that it
should remain a mystery. 

            'we
need more true mystery in our lives, hem,' he once said to me. 'the completely
unambitious writer and the really good unpublished poem are the things we lack
most at this time. there is, of course, the problem of sustenance.'

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–17–

Scott Fitzgerald

 

 

            His
talent was as natural as the pattern that was made by the dust on a butterfly swings.
at one time he understood it no more than the butterfly did and he did not know
when it was brushed or marred. later he became conscious of his damaged
wings and of their construction and he learned to think and could not fly any
more because the love of flight was gone and he could only remember when it had
been effortless. 

            The
first time i ever met scott fitzgerald a very strange thing happened. many
strange things happened with scott but this one i was never able to forget. he
had come into the dingo bar in the rue delambre where i was sitting with some
completely worthless characters, had introduced himself and introduced a tall,
pleasant man who was with him as dunc chaplin, the famous pitcher. i had not
followed princeton baseball and had never heard of dune chaplin but he was
extraordinarily nice, unworried, relaxed and friendly and i much preferred him
to scott. 

            Scott
was a man then who looked like a boy with a face between handsome and pretty.
he had very fair wavy hair, a high forehead, excited and friendly eyes and a
delicate long-lipped irish mouth that, on a girl, would have been the mouth of
a beauty. 

            His
chin was well built and he had good ears and a handsome, almost beautiful,
unmarked nose. this should not have added up to a pretty face, but that came
from the colouring, the very fair hair and the mouth. the mouth worried you
until you knew him and then it worried you more. 

            i
was very curious to see him and i had been working very hard all day and it
seemed quite wonderful that here should be scott fitzgerald and the great dunc
chaplin whom i had never heard of but who was now my friend. scott did not stop
talking and since i was embarrassed by what he said - it was all about my
writing and how great it was - i kept on looking at him closely and noticed
instead of listening. we still went under the system, then, that praise to the
face was open disgrace. scott had ordered champagne and he and dunc chaplin and
i drank it together with, i think, some of the worthless characters. i do not
think that dunc or i followed the speech very closely, for it was a speech and
i kept on observing scott. he was lightly built and did not look in awfully
good shape, his face being faintly puffy. his brooks brothers clothes fitted
him well and he wore a white shirt with a buttoned-down collar and a guards'
tie. i thought i ought to tell him about the tie, maybe, because they did have
british in paris and one might come into the dingo - there were two there at
the time - 

            but
then i thought the hell with it and i looked at him some more. it turned out
later he had bought the tie in rome. 

            i
wasn't learning very much from looking at him now except that he had well-shaped,
capable-looking hands, not too small, and when he sat down on one of the bar
stools i saw that he had very short legs. with normal legs he would have been
perhaps two inches taller. we had finished the first bottle of champagne and
started on the second and the speech was beginning to run down. 

            both
dunc and i were beginning to feel even better than we had felt before the
champagne and it was nice to have the speech ending. until then i had felt that
what a great writer i was had been carefully kept secret between myself and my
wife and only those people we knew well enough to speak to. i was glad scott
had come to the same happy conclusion as to this possible greatness, but i was
also glad he was beginning to run out of the speech. but after the speech came
the question period. you could study him and neglect to follow the speech, but
the questions were inescapable. 

            scott,
i was to find, believed that the novelist could find out what he needed to know
by direct questioning of his friends and acquaintances. the interrogation was
direct. 

            'ernest,'
he said. 'you don't mind if i call you ernest, do you?' 

            'ask
dunc,' i said. 

            don't
be silly. this is serious. tell me, did you and your wife sleep together before
you were married?' 

            'i
don't know.' 

            'what
do you mean, you don't know?' 

            'i
don't remember.' 

            'but
how can you not remember something of such importance?' 

            'i
don't know,' i said. 'it is odd, isn't it?' 

            'it's
worse than odd,' scott said. 'you must be able to remember.' 

            'i'm
sorry. it's a pity, isn't it?' 

            'don't
talk like some limey,' he-said. 'try to be serious and remember.' 

            'nope,'
i said, 'it's hopeless.' 

            'you
could make an honest effort to remember.' 

            the
speech comes pretty high, i thought. i wondered if he gave everyone the speech,
but i didn't think so because i had watched him sweat while he was making it. 

            the
sweat had come out on his long, perfect irish upper lip in tiny drops, and that
was when i had looked down away from his face and checked on the length of his
legs, drawn up as he sat on the bar stool. now i looked back at his face again
and it was then that the strange thing happened. 

            as
he sat there at the bar holding the glass of champagne the skin seemed to
tighten over his face until all the puffiness was gone and then it drew tighter
until the face was like a death's head. the eyes sank and began to look dead
and the lips were drawn tight and the colour left the face so that it was the
colour of used candle wax. 

            this
was not my imagination. his face became a true death's head, or death mask, in
front of my eyes. 

            'scott,'
i said. 'are you all right?' 

            he
did not answer and his face looked more drawn than ever. 

            'we'd
better get him to a first-aid station,' i said to dunc chaplin. 

            'no.
he's all right.' 

            'he
looks like he is dying.' 

            'no.
that's the way it takes him.' 

            we
got him into a taxi and i was very worried but dunc said he was all right and
not to worry about him. 'he'll probably be all right by the time he gets home,'
he said. 

            he
must have been because, when i met him at the closerie des lilas a few days
later, i said that i was sorry the stuff had hit him that way and that maybe we
had drunk it too fast while we were talking. 

            'what
do you mean, you are sorry? what stuff hit me what way? what are you talking
about, ernest?' 

            'i
meant the other night at the dingo.' 

            'there
was nothing wrong with me at the dingo. i simply got tired of those absolutely
bloody british you were with and went home.' 

            'there
weren't any british there when you were there. only the bartender.' 

            'don't
try to make a mystery of it. you know the ones i mean.' 

            'oh,'
i said. he had gone back to the dingo later. or he'd gone there another time. 

            no,
i remembered, there had been two british there. it was true. i remembered who
they were. they had been there all right. 

            'yes,'
i said. 'of course.' 

            'that
girl with the phony title who was so rude and that silly drunk with her. they
said they were friends of yours.' 

            'they
are. and she is  very rude
sometimes.' 

            'you
see. there's no use to make mysteries simply because one has drunk a few
glasses of wine. why did you want to make the mysteries? it isn't the sort of
thing i thought you would do.' 

            'i
don't know,' i wanted to drop it. then i thought of something. 'were they rude
about your tie?' i asked. 

            'why
should they have been rude about my tie? i was wearing a plain black knitted
tie with a white polo shirt.' 

            i
gave up then and he asked me why i liked this cafe and i told him about it in
the old days and he began to try to like it too and we sat there, me liking it
and he trying to like it, and he asked questions and told me about writers and
publishers and agents and critics and george horace lorimer, and the gossip and
economics of being a successful writer, and he was cynical and funny and very
jolly and charming and endearing, even if you were careful about anyone
becoming endearing. he spoke slightingly but without bitterness of everything
he had written, and i knew his new book must be very good for him to speak,
without bitterness, of the faults of past books. he wanted me to read the new
book, the great gatsby,  as soon
as he could get his last and only copy back from someone he had loaned it to.
to hear him talk of it, you would never know how very good it was, except that
he had the shyness about it that all non-conceited writers have when they have
done something very fine, and i hoped he would get the book quickly so that i
might read it. 

            scott
told me that he had heard from maxwell perkins that , the book was not selling
well but that it had very fine reviews. i do not remember whether it was that
day, or much later, that he showed me a review by gilbert seldes that could not
have been better. it could only have been better if gilbert seldes had been better.
scott was puzzled and hurt that the book was not selling well but, as i said,
he was not at all bitter then and he was both shy and happy about the book's
quality. 

            on
this day as we sat outside on the terrace of the lilas and watched it get dusk
and the people passing on the sidewalk and the grey light of the evening
changing, there was no chemical change in him from the two whisky and sodas
that we drank. i watched carefully for it, but it did not come and he asked no
shameless questions, did nothing embarrassing, made no speeches, and acted as a
normal, intelligent and charming person. 

            he
told me that he and zelda, his wife, had been compelled to abandon their small
renault motor car in lyon because of bad weather and he asked me if i would go
down to lyon with him on the train to pick up the car and drive up with him to
paris. the fitzgeralds had rented a furnished flat at 14 rue de tilsitt, not
far from the etoile. it was late spring now and i thought the country would be
at its best and we could have an excellent trip. scott seemed so nice and so
reasonable, and i had watched him drink two good solid whiskies and nothing
happened, and his charm and his seeming good sense made the other night at the
dingo seem like an unpleasant dream. so i said i would like to go down to lyon
with him and when did he want to leave. 

            We
agreed to meet the next day and we then arranged to leave for lyon on the
express train that left in the morning. this train left at a convenient hour
and was very fast. it made only one stop, as i recall, at dijon. we planned to
get into lyon, have the car checked and in good shape, have an excellent dinner
and get an early-morning start back towards paris. 

            I
was enthusiastic about the trip. i would have the company of an older and
successful writer, and in the time we would have to talk in the car i would
certainly learn much that it would be useful to know. it is strange now to
remember thinking of scott as an older writer, but at the time, since i had not
yet read the great gatsby,  i
thought of him as a much older writer. i thought he wrote saturday evening
post  stories that had been readable
three years before, but i never thought of him as a serious writer. he had told
me at the closerie des lilas how he wrote what he thought were good stories,
and which really were good stories for the post,  and then changed them for submission, knowing
exactly how he must make the twists that made them into saleable magazine
stories. i had been shocked at this and i said i thought it was whoring. he
said it was whoring but that he had to do it as he made his money from the
magazines to have money ahead to write decent books. i said that i did not
believe anyone could write any way except the very best he could write without
destroying his talent. since he wrote the real story first, he said, the
destruction and changing of it that he did at the end did him no harm. i could
not believe this and i wanted to argue him out of it but i needed a novel to
back up my faith and to show him and convince him, and i had not yet written
any such novel. since i had started to break down all my writing and get rid of
all facility and try to make instead of descrbe, writing had been wonderful to
do. but it was very difficult, and i did not know how i would ever write
anything as long as a novel. it often took me a full morning of work to write a
paragraph. 

            My
wife, hadley, was happy for me to make the trip, though she did not take
seriously the writing of scott's that she had read. her idea of a good writer was
henry james. but she thought it was a good idea for me to take a rest from work
and make the trip, although we both wished that we had enough money to have a
car and were making the trip ourselves. but that was something i never had any
idea would happen. 

            I
had received an advance of two hundred dollars from boni and liveright for a
first book of short stories to be published in america that fall, and i was
selling stories to the frankfurter zeitung  and to der querschnitt  in berlin and to this quarter  and the transatlantic review  in paris, and we were living with great
economy and not spending any money except for necessities in order to save
money to go down to the feria  at
pamplona in july and to madrid and to the feria  in valencia afterwards. 

            On
the morning we were to leave from the gare de lyon i arrived in plenty of time
and waited outside the train gates for scott. he was bringing the tickets. when
it got close to the time for the train to leave and he had not arrived, i
bought an entry'ticket to the track and walked along the side of the train
looking for him. i did not see him and as the train was about to pull out i got
aboard and walked through the train hoping only that he would be aboard. it was
a long train and he was not on it. i explained the situation to the conductor,
paid for a ticket, second class - there was no third - and asked the conductor
for the name of the best hotel in lyon. there was nothing to do but wire scott
from dijon giving him the address of the hotel where i would wait for him in
lyon. he would not get it before he left, but his wife would be presumed to
wire it on to him. i had never heard, then, of a grown man missing a train; but
on this trip i was to learn many new things. 

            In
those days i had a very bad, quick temper, but by the time we were through
montereau it had quieted down and i was not too angry to watch and enjoy the
countryside and at noon i had a good lunch in the dining-car and drank a bottle
of st-emilion and thought that even if i had been a damned fool to accept an
invitation for a trip that was to be paid for by someone else, and was spending
money on it that we needed to go to spain, it was a good lesson for me. i had
never before accepted an invitation to go on any trip that was paid for, instead
of the cost split, and in this one i had insisted that we split the cost of the
hotels and meals. but now i did not know whether Fitzgerald would even show up.
while i had been angry i had demoted him from Scott to Fitzgerald. Later i was
delighted that i had used up the anger at the start and got it over with. it
was not a trip designed for a man easy to anger. 

            In
lyon i learned that scott left paris for lyon but had left no word as to where
he was staying. i confirmed my address there and the servant said she would let
him know if he called. madame was not well and was still sleeping. i called all
the name hotels and left messages but could not locate scott and then i went
out to a cafe to have an aperitif and read the papers. at the cafe i met a man
who ate fire for a living and also bent coins which he held in his toothless
jaws with his thumb and forefinger. 

            His
gums were sore but firm to the eye as he exhibited them and he said it was not
a bad metier.  i asked him to have
a drink and he was pleased. he had a fine dark face that glowed and shone when
he ate the fire. he said there was no money in eating fire nor in feats of
strength with fingers and jaws in lyon false fire-eaters had ruined the metier
 and would continue to ruin it
wherever they were allowed to practise. he had been eating fire all evening, he
said, and did not have enough money on him to eat anything else that night. i
asked him to have another drink, to wash away the petrol taste of the
fire-eating, and said we could have dinner together if he knew a good place
that was cheap enough. he said he knew an excellent place. 

            We
ate very cheaply in an algerian restaurant and i liked the food and the
algerian wine. the fire-eater was a nice man and it was interesting to see him
eat, as he could chew with his gums as well as most people can with their
teeth. he asked me what i did to make a living and i told him that i was
starting in as a writer. he asked what sort of writing and i told him stories.
he said he knew many stories, some of them more horrible and incredible than
anything that had ever been written. he could tell them to me and i would write
them and then if they made any money i would give him whatever i thought fair.
better still, we could go to north africa together and he would take me to the
country of the blue sultan where i could get stories such as no man had ever
heard. 

            I
asked him what sort of stories and he said battles, executions, tortures,
violations, fearful customs, unbelievable practices, debaucheries; anything i
needed. it was getting time for me to get back to the hotel and check on scott
again, so i paid for the meal and said we would certainly be running into each
other again. he said he was working down towards marseilles and i said sooner
or later we would meet somewhere and it was a pleasure to have dined together.
i left him straightening out bent coins and stacking them on the table and
walked back to the hotel. 

            Lyon
was not a very cheerful town at night. it was a big, heavy, solid-money town,
probably fine if you had money and liked that sort of town. for years i had
heard about the wonderful chicken in the restaurants there, but we had eaten
mutton instead. the mutton had been excellent. 

            There
was no word from scott at the hotel and i went to bed in the unaccustomed
luxury of the hotel and read a copy of the first volume of a. sportsman's
sketches by turgenev that i had borrowed from sylvia beach's library. i had
not been in the luxury of a big hotel for three years and i opened the windows
wide and rolled up the pillows under my shoulders and head and was happy being
with turgenev in russia until i was asleep while still reading. i was shaving
in the morning getting ready to go out for breakfast when they called from the
desk saying a gentleman was downstairs to see me. 

            'Ask
him to come up, please,' i said and went on shaving, listening to the town
which had come heavily alive since early morning. 

            Scott
did not come up and i met him down at the desk. 

            'I’m
terribly sorry there was this mix-up,' he said. 'if i had only known what hotel
you were going to it would have been simple.' 

            'That’s
all right,' i said. we were going to have a long ride and i was all for peace. 

            'What
train did you come down on?' 

            'One
not long after the one you took. it was a very comfortable train and we might
just as well have come down together.' 

            'Have
you had breakfast?' 

            'Not
yet. i've been hunting all over the town for you.' 

            'That’s
a shame,' i said. 'didn't they tell you at home that i was here?' 

            'No.
Zelda wasn't feeling well and i probably shouldn't have come. the whole trip
has been disastrous so far.' 

            'Let’s
get some breakfast and find the car and roll,' i said. 

            'That’s
fine. should we have breakfast here?' 

            'It
would be quicker in a cafe.' 

            'But
we're sure to get a good breakfast here.' 

            'all
right.' 

            it
was a big american breakfast with ham and eggs and it was very good. but by the
time we had ordered it, waited for it, eaten it, and waited to pay for it,
close to an hour had been lost. it was not until the waiter came with the bill
that scott decided that we have the hotel make us a picnic lunch. i tried to
argue him out of this as i was sure we could get a bottle of macon in macon and
we could buy something to make sandwiches in a charcuterie.  or, if things were closed when we went
through, there would be any number of restaurants where we could stop on our
way. but he said i had told him that the chicken was wonderful in lyon and that
we should certainly take one with us. so the hotel made us a lunch that could
not have cost us very much more than four or five times what it would have cost
us if we had bought it ourselves. 

            scott
had obviously been drinking before i met him and, as he looked as though he
needed a drink, i asked him if he did not want one in the bar before we set
out. he told me he was not a morning drinker arid asked if i was. i told him it
depended entirely on how i felt and what i had to do and he said that if i felt
that i needed a drink, he would keep me company so i would not have to drink
alone. so we had a whisky and perrier in the bar while we waited for the lunch
and both felt much better. 

            i
paid for the hotel room and the bar, although scott wanted to pay for
everything. 

            since
the start of the trip i had felt a little complicated about it emotionally and
i found i felt much better the more things i could pay for. i was using up the
money we had saved for spain, but i knew i had good credit with sylvia beach
and could borrow and repay whatever i was wasting now. 

            at
the garage where scott had left the car, i was astonished to find that the
small renault had no top. the top had been damaged in unloading the car in
marseilles, or it had been damaged in marseilles in some manner and zelda had
ordered it cut away and refused to have it replaced. his wife hated car tops,
scott told me, and without the top they had driven as far as lyon where they
were halted by the rain. the car was in fair shape otherwise and scott paid the
bill after disputing several charges for washing, greasing, and for adding two
litres of oil. the garage man explained to me that the car needed new piston
rings and had evidently been run without sufficient oil and water. 

            He
showed me how it had heated up and burned the paint off the motor. he said if i
could persuade monsieur to have a ring job done in paris, the car, which was a
good little car, would be able to give the service it was built for. 

            'Monsieur
would not let me replace the top.' 

            'No?'

            'one
has an obligation to a vehicle.' 

            'one
has.' 

            'you
gentlemen have no waterproofs?' 

            'no,'
i said. 'i did not know about the top.' 

            'try
and make monsieur be serious,' he said pleadingly. 'at least about the
vehicle.' 

            'ah,'
i said. 

            we
were halted by rain about an hour north of lyon. 

            In
that day we were halted by rain possibly ten times. they were passing showers
and some of them were longer than others. if we had had waterproof coats it
would have been pleasant enough to drive in that spring rain. as it was we
sought the shelter of trees or halted at cafes alongside the road. we had a
marvellous lunch from the hotel at lyon, an excellent truffled roast chicken,
delicious bread and white macon wine and scott was very happy when we drank the
white maconnais at each of our stops. at macon i had bought four more bottles
of excellent wine which i uncorked as we needed them. 

            i
am not sure scott had ever drunk wine from a bottle before and it was exciting
to him as though he were slumming or as a girl might be excited by going
swimming for the first time without a bathing suit. but, by early afternoon, he
had begun to worry about his health. he told me about two people who had died
of congestion of the lungs recently. both of them had died in italy and he had
been deeply impressed. 

            i
told him that congestion of the lungs was an old-fashioned term for pneumonia,
and he told me that i knew nothing about it and was absolutely wrong.
congestion of the lungs was a malady which was indigenous to europe and i could
not possibly know anything about it even if i had read my father's medical
books, since they dealt with diseases that were strictly american. i said that
my father had studied in europe too. but scott explained that congestion of the
lungs had only appeared in europe recently and that my father could not
possibly have known anything about it. he also explained that diseases were
different in different parts of america, and if my father had practised
medicine in new york instead of in the middle west, he would have known an
entirely different gamut of diseases. he used the word gamut. 

            i
said he had a good point in the prevalence of certain diseases in one part of
the united states and their absence in others and cited the amount of leprosy
in new orleans and its low incidence, then, in chicago. but i said that doctors
had a system of exchange of knowledge and information among themselves and now
that i remembered it after he had brought it up, i had read the authoritative
article on congestion of the lungs in europe in the journal of the american
medical association, which traced its history back to hippocrates himself.
this held him for a while and i urged him to take another drink of macon, since
a good white wine, moderately full-bodied but with a low alcoholic content, was
almost a specific against the disease. 

            scott
cheered a little after this but he began to fail again shortly and asked me if
we would make a big town before the onset of the fever and delirium by which, i
had told him, the true congestion of the lungs, european, announced itself. i
was now translating from an article which i had read in a french medical
journal on the same malady while waiting at the american hospital in neuilly to
have my throat cauterized, i told him. a word like cauterized had a comforting
effect on scott. but he wanted to know when we would make the town. i said if
we pushed on we should make it in twenty-five minutes to an hour. 

            scott
then asked me if i were afraid to die and i said more at some times than at others.

            It
now began to rain really heavily and we took refuge in the next village at a
cafe. 

            I
cannot remember all the details of that afternoon but when we were finally in a
hotel at what must have been chalon-sur-saone, it was so late that the
drugstores were closed. scott had undressed and gone to bed as soon as we
reached the hotel. he did not mind dying of congestion of the lungs, he said.
it was only the question of who was to look after zelda and young scotty. i did
not see very well how i could look after them since i was having a healthily
rough time looking after my wife hadley and young son bumby, but i said i would
do my best and scott thanked me. i must see that zelda did not drink and that
scotty should have an english governess. 

            we
had sent our clothes to be dried and were in our pyjamas. it was still raining
outside but it was cheerful in the room with the electric light on. scott was
lying in bed to conserve his strength for his battle against the disease. i had
taken his pulse, which was seventy-two, and had felt his forehead, which was
cool. i had listened to his chest and had him breathe deeply, and his chest
sounded all right. 

            'look,
scott,' i said. 'you're perfectly ok. if you want to do the best thing to keep
from catching cold, just stay in bed and i'll order us each a lemonade and a
whisky and you take an aspirin with yours and you'll feel fine and won't even
get a cold in your head.' 

            "those
old wives' remedies,' scott said. 

            'you
haven't any temperature. how the hell are you going to have congestion of the
lungs without a temperature?' 

            'don't
swear at me,' scott said. 'how do you know i haven't a temperature?' 

            'your
pulse is normal and you haven't any fever to the touch.' 

            'to
the touch,' scott said bitterly. 'if you're a real friend, get me a
thermometer.' 

            'i'm
in pyjamas.' 

            'send
for one.' 

            i
rang for the waiter. he didn't come and i rang again and then went down the
hallway to look for him. scott was lying with his eyes closed, breathing slowly
and carefully and, with his waxy colour and his perfect features, he looked
like a little dead crusader. i was getting tired of the literary life, if this
was the literary life that i was leading, and already i missed not working and
i felt the death loneliness that comes at the end of every day that is wasted
in your life. i was very tired of scott and of this silly comedy, but i found
the waiter and gave him money to buy a thermometer and a tube of aspirin, and
ordered two citrons presses  and
two double whiskies. i tried to order a bottle of whisky but they would only
sell it by the drink. 

            back
in the room scott was still lying as though on his tomb, sculpted as a monument
to himself, his eyes closed and breathing with exemplary dignity. 

            hearing
me come in the room, he spoke. 'did you get the thermometer?' 

            i
went over and put my hand on his forehead. it was not as cold as the tomb. but
it was cool and not clammy. 

            'Nope,'
i said. 

            'I
thought you'd brought it.' 

            'I
sent out for it.' 

            'It’s
not the same thing.' 

            'No.
it isn't, is it?' 

            You
could not be angry with Scott any more than you could be angry with someone who
was crazy, but i was getting angry with myself for having become involved in
the whole silliness. he did have a point though, and i knew it very well. most
drunkards in those days died of pneumonia, a disease which has now been almost
eliminated. but it was hard to accept him as a drunkard, since he was affected
by such small quantities of alcohol. 

            In
Europe then we thought of wine as something as healthy and normal as food and
also as a great giver of happiness and well-being and delight. drinking wine
was not a snobbism nor a sign of sophistication nor a cult; it was as natural
as eating and to me as necessary, and i would not have thought of eating a meal
without drinking either wine or cider or beer. i loved all wines except sweet
or sweetish wines and wines that were too heavy, and it had never occurred to
me that sharing a few bottles of fairly light, dry, white macon could cause
chemical changes in scott that would turn him into a fool. there had been the
whisky and perrier in the morning but, in my ignorance of alcoholics then, i
could not imagine one whisky harming anyone who was driving in an open car in
the rain. the alcohol should have been oxidized in a very short time. 

            while
waiting for the waiter to bring the various things i sat and read a paper and
finished one of the bottles of macon that had been uncorked at the last stop.
there are always some splendid crimes in the newspapers that you follow from
day to day, when you live in france. these crimes read like continued stories
and it is necessary to have read the opening chapters, since there are no
summaries provided as there are in american serial stories and, anyway, no
serial is as good in an american periodical unless you have read the
all-important first chapter. when you are travelling through france the papers
are disappointing because you miss the continuity of the different crimes,
affaires,  or scandales,  and you miss much of the pleasure to be
derived from reading about them in a cafe. tonight i would have much preferred
to be in a cafe where i might read the morning editions of the paris papers and
watch the people and drink something a little more authoritative than the macon
in preparation for dinner. but i was riding herd on scott so i enjoyed myself
where i was. 

            when
the waiter arrived with the two glasses with the pressed lemon juice and ice,
the whiskies, and the bottle of perrier water, he told me that the pharmacy was
closed and he could not get a thermometer. he had borrowed some aspirin. i
asked him to see if he could borrow a thermometer. scott opened his eyes and
gave a baleful irish look at the waiter. 

            'have
you told him how serious it is?' he asked. 

            'i
think he understands.' 

            'please
try to make it clear.' 

            i
tried to make it clear and the waiter said, 'i'll bring what i can.' 

            'did
you tip him enough to do any good? they only work for tips.' 

            'i
didn't know that,' i said. 'i thought the hotel paid them something on the
side.' 

            'i
mean they will only do something for you for a substantial tip. most of them
are rotten clean through.' 

            i
thought of evan shipman and i thought of the waiter at the closerie des lilas
who had been forced to cut his moustache when they made the american bar at the
closerie, and of how evan had been working out at his garden in montrouge long
before i had met scott, and what good friends we all were and had been for a
long time at the lilas and of all of the moves that had been made and what they
meant to all of us. i thought of telling scott about this whole problem of the
lilas, although i had probably mentioned it to him before, but i knew he did
not care about waiters nor their problems nor their great kindness and
affections. at that time scott hated the french, and since almost the only
french he met with regularly were waiters whom he did not understand,
taxi-drivers, garage employees and landlords, he had many opportunities to
insult and abuse them. 

            he
hated the italians even more than the french and could not talk about them
calmly even when he was sober. the english he often hated but he sometimes
tolerated them and occasionally looked up to them. i do not know how he felt
about the germans and the austrians. i do not know whether he had ever met any
then or any swiss. 

            on
this evening in the hotel i was delighted that he was being so calm. i had
mixed the lemonade and whisky and given it to him with two aspirins and he had
swallowed the aspirins without protest and with admirable calm and was sipping
his drink. his eyes were open now and were looking far away. i was reading the crime
 in the inside of the paper and was
quite happy, too happy it seemed. 

            'you're
a cold one, aren't you?' scott asked and looking at him i saw that i had been
wrong in my prescription, if not in my diagnosis, and that the whisky was
working against us. 

            'how
do you mean, scott?' 

            'you
can sit there and read that dirty french rag of a paper and it doesn't mean a
thing to you that i am dying.' 

            'do
you want me to call a doctor?' 

            'no.
i don't want a dirty french provincial doctor.' 

            'what
do you want?' 

            'i
want my temperature taken. then i want my clothes dried and for us to get on an
express train for paris and to go to the american hospital at neuilly.' 

            'our
clothes won't be dry until morning and there aren't any express trains,' i
said. 

            'why
don't you rest and have some dinner in bed?' 

            'i
want my temperature taken.' 

            after
this went on for a long time the waiter brought a thermometer. 

            'is
this the only one you could get?' i asked. scott had shut his eyes when the
waiter came in and he did look at least as far gone as camille. i have never
seen a man who lost the blood from his face so fast and i wondered where it
went. 

            'it
is the only one in the hotel,' the waiter said and handed me the thermometer.
it was a bath thermometer with a wooden back and enough metal to sink it in the
bath. i took a quick gulp of the whisky sour and opened the window a moment to
look out at the rain. when i turned scott was watching me. 

            i
shook the thermometer down professionally and said, 'you're lucky it's not a
rectal thermometer.' 

            'where
does this kind go?' 

            'under
the arm,' i told him and tucked it under my arm. 

            'don't
upset the temperature,' scott said. i shook the thermometer again with a single
sharp downward twitch and unbuttoned his pyjama jacket and put the instrument
under his armpit while i felt his cool forehead and then took his pulse again.
he stared straight ahead. the pulse was seventy-two. i kept the thermometer in
for four minutes. 

            'i
thought they only kept them in for one minute,' scott said. 

            'this
is a big thermometer,' i explained. 'you multiply by the square of the size of
the thermometer. it's a centigrade thermometer.' 

            finally
i took the thermometer out and carried it over by the reading light. 

            'what
is it?' 

            'thirty-seven
and six-tenths.' 

            'what's
normal.' 

            'that's
normal.' 

            'are
you sure?' 

            'sure.'

            'try
it on yourself. i have to be sure.' 

            i
shook the thermometer down and opened my pyjamas and put the thermometer in my
armpit and held it there while i watched the time. then i looked at it. 

            'what
is it?' 

            i
studied it. 'exactly the same.' 

            'how
do you feel?' 

            'splendid,'
i said. i was trying to remember whether thirty-seven six was really normal or
not. it did not matter, for the thermometer, unaffected, was steady at thirty. 

            scott
was a little suspicious so i asked if he wanted me to make another test. 

            'no,'
he said. 'we can be happy it cleared up so quickly. i've -always had great
recuperative power.' 

            'you're
fine,' i said. 'but i think it would be just as well if you stayed in bed and
had a light supper, and then we can start early in the morning.' i had planned
to buy us raincoats but i would have to borrow money from him for that and i
did not want to start arguing about that now. 

            scott
did not want to stay in bed. he wanted to get up and get dressed and go
downstairs and call zelda so she would know he was all right. 

            'why
would she think you weren't all right?' 

            'this
is the first night i have ever slept away from her since we were married and i
have to talk to her. you can see what it means to us both, can't you?' 

            i
could, but i could not see how he and zelda could have slept together on the
night just past; but it was nothing to argue about. scott drank the whisky sour
down very fast now and asked me to order another. i found the waiter and
returned the thermometer and asked him how our clothes were coming along. he
thought they might be dry in an hour or so. 'have the valet press them and that
will dry them. it doesn't matter that they should be bone-dry.' 

            The
waiter brought the two drinks against catching cold and i sipped mine and urged
scott to sip his slowly. i was worried now he might catch cold and i could see
by now that if he ever had anything as definitely bad as a cold he would
probably have to be hospitalized. but the drink made him feel wonderful for a
while and he was happy with the tragic implications of this being zelda's and
his first night of separation since their marriage. finally he could not wait
longer to call her and put on his dressing-gown and went down to put the call
through. 

            It
would take some time for the call and shortly after he came up, the waiter appeared
with two more double whisky sours. this was the most i had ever seen scott
drink until then, but they had no effect on him except to make him more
animated and talkative, and he started to tell me the outline of his life with
zelda. he told me how he had first met her during the war and then lost her and
won her back, and about their marriage and then about something tragic that had
happened to them at st-raphael about a year ago. this first version that he
told me of zelda .  and a french
naval aviator falling in love was truly a sad story and i believe it was a true
story. later he told me other versions of it as though trying them for use in a
novel, but none was as sad as this first one and i always believed the first
one, although any of them might have been true. they were better told each time;
but they never hurt you the same way the first one did. 

            Scott
was very articulate and told a story well. he did not have to spell the words
nor attempt to punctuate and you did not have the feeling of reading an
illiterate that his letters gave you before they had been corrected. i knew him
for two years before he could spell my name; but then it was a long name to
spell and perhaps it became harder to spell all of the time, and i give him
great credit for spelling it correctly finally. 

            he
learned to spell more important things and he tried to think straight about
many more. 

            on
this night though he wanted me to know and understand and appreciate what it
was that had happened at st-raphael and i saw it so clearly that i could see
the single-seater seaplane buzzing the diving-raft and the colour of the sea
and the shape of the pontoons and the shadow that they cast and zelda's tan and
scott's tan and the dark blonde and the light blond of their hair and the
darkly tanned face of the boy that was in love with zelda. i could not ask the
question that was in my mind, how, if this story was true and it had all
happened, could scott have slept each night in the same bed with zelda? but
maybe that was what had made it sadder than any story anyone had ever told me
then, and, too, maybe he did not remember, as he did not remember last night. 

            our
clothes came before the call did and we dressed and went downstairs to have
dinner. scott was a little unsteady now and he looked at people out of the side
of his eyes with a certain belligerency. we had very good snails, with a carafe
to start with and while we were about halfway through them scott's call came he
was gone about an hour and i ate his snails finally, dipping up the butter,
garlic and parsley sauce with the broken bits of bread, and drank the carafe of
fleury. when he came back i said i would get him some more snails but he said
he did not want any. he wanted something simple. he did not want a steak, nor
liver and bacon, nor an omelette. he would take chicken. we had eaten very good
cold chicken at noon but this was still famous chicken country, so we had poularde
de bresse  and a bottle of montagny,
a light, pleasant white wine of the neighbourhood. scott ate very little and
sipped at one glass of the wine. he passed out at the table with his head on
his hands. it was natural and there was no theatre about it and it even looked
as though he were careful not to spill nor break things. the waiter and i got
him up to his room and laid him on the bed and i undressed him to his
underwear, hung his clothes up, and then stripped the covers off the bed and
spread them over him. i opened the window and saw it was clear outside and left
the window open. 

            downstairs
i finished my dinner and thought about scott. it was obvious he should not
drink anything and i had not been taking good care of him. anything that he
drank seemed to stimulate him too much and then to poison him and i planned the
next day to cut all drinking to the minimum. i would tell him that we were
getting back to paris now and that i had to train in order to write. this was
not true. my training was never to drink after dinner nor before i wrote nor
while i was writing. i went upstairs and opened all the windows wide and
undressed and. was asleep almost as soon as i was in bed. 

            The
next day we drove to paris on a beautiful day up through the cote d'or with the
air freshly washed and the hills and the fields and the vineyards all new, and
scott was very cheerful and happy and healthy and told me the plots of each and
every one of michael arlen's books. michael arlen, he said, was the man you had
to watch and he and i could both learn much from him. i said i could not read
the books. he said i did not have to. he would tell me the plots and describe
the characters. he gave me a sort of oral phd thesis on michael arlen. 

            I
asked him if he had a good connection on the phone when he talked to zelda and
he said that it was not bad and that they had many things to talk about. at
meals i ordered one bottle of the lightest wine i could locate and told scott
he would do me a great favour if he would not let me order any more as i had to
train before i wrote and should not under any circumstances drink more than
half a bottle. he cooperated wonderfully and when he saw me looking nervous
towards the end of a single bottle, gave me some of his share. 

            when
i had left him at his home and taken a taxi back to the sawmill, it was
wonderful to see my wife and we went up to the closerie des lilas to have a
drink. we were happy the way children are who have been separated and are
together again, and i told her about the trip. 

            'but
didn't you have any fun or learn anything, tatie?' she asked. 

            'i
learned about michael arlen, if i would have listened, and i learned things i
haven't sorted out.' 

            'isn't
scott happy at all?' 

            'maybe.'

            'poor
man.' 

            'i
learned one thing.' 

            'what?'

            'never
to go on trips with anyone you do not love.' 

            'isn't
that fine?' 

            'yes.
and we're going to spain.' 

            'yes.
now it's less than six weeks before we go. and this year we won't let anyone
spoil it, will we?' 

            'no.
and after pamplona we'll go to madrid and to valencia.' 

            'm-m-m-m,'
she said softly, like a cat. 

            'poor
scott,' i said. 

            'poor
everybody,' hadley said. 'rich feathercats with no money.' 

            'we're
awfully lucky.' 

            'We'll
have to be good and hold it.' 

            We
both touched wood on the cafe table and the waiter came to see what it was we
wanted. but what we wanted he, nor anyone else, nor knocking on wood or on
marble, asthis cafe table-top was, could ever bring us. but we did not know it
that night and we were very happy. 

            A
day or two after the trip scott brought his book over. it had a garish
dust-jacket and i remember being embarrassed by the violence, bad taste and
slippery look of it. it looked the book jacket for a book of bad science
fiction. scott told me not to be put off by it, that it had to do with a
billboard along a highway in long island that was important in the story. he
said he had liked the jacket and now he didn't like it. i took it off to read
the book. 

            When
i had finished the book i knew that no matter what scott did, nor how he
behaved, i must know it was like a sickness and be of any help i could to him
and try to be a good friend. he had many good, good friends, more than anyone i
knew. but i enlisted as one more, whether i could be of any use to him or not.
if he could write a book as fine as the great gatsby  i was sure that he could write an even better
one. i did not know zelda yet, and so i did not know the terrible odds that
were against him. 

            But
we were to find them out soon enough.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–18–

Hawks Do Not Share

 

 

            Scott
Fitzgerald invited us to have lunch with his wife Zelda and his little daughter
at the furnished flat they had rented at 14 rue de tilsitt. i cannot remember
much about the flat except that it was gloomy and airless and that there was
nothing in it that seemed to belong to them except scott's first books bound in
light blue leather with the titles in gold. scott also showed us a large ledger
with all of the stories he had published listed in it year after year with the
prices he had received for them and also the amounts received for any motion
picture sales, and the sales and royalties of his books. they were all noted as
carefully as the log of a ship and scott showed them to both of us with
impersonal pride as though he were the curator of a museum. scott was nervous
and hospitable and he showed us his accounts of his earnings as though they had
been the view. there was no view. 

            Zelda
had a very bad hangover. they had been up on montmartre the night before and
had quarrelled because scott did not want to get drunk. he had decided, he told
me, to work hard and not to drink and zelda was treating him as though he were
a kill-joy or a spoilsport. those were the two words she used to him and there
was recrimination and zelda would say, 'i did not, i did no such thing. it's
not true, scott.' 

            Later
she would seem to recall something and would laugh happily. 

            On
this day zelda did not look her best. her beautiful dark blonde hair had been
ruined temporarily by a bad permanent she had got in lyon, when the rain had
made them abandon their car, and her eyes were tired and her face was too taut
and drawn. 

            She
was formally pleasant to hadley and me but a big part of her seemed not to be
present but to still be on the party she had come home from that morning. she
and scott both seemed to feel that scott and i had enjoyed a great and
wonderful time on the trip up from lyon and she was jealous about it. 

            'when
you two can go off and have such simply wonderful times together, it only seems
fair that i should have just a little fun with our good friends here in paris,'
she said to scott. 

            Scott
was being the perfect host and we ate a very bad lunch that the wine cheered a
little but not much. the little girl was blonde, chubby-faced, well built, and
very healthy-looking and spoke english with a strong cockney accent. scott
explained that she had an english nanny because he wanted her to speak like
lady diana manners when she grew up. 

            Zelda
had hawk's eyes and a thin mouth and deep-south manners and accent. 

            Watching
her face you could see her mind leave the table and go to the night's party and
return with her eyes blank as a cat's and then pleased, and the pleasure would
show along the thin line of her lips and then be gone. scott was being the good
cheerful host and zelda looked at him and she smiled happily with her eyes and
her mouth too as he drank the wine. i learned to know that smile very well. it
meant she knew scott would not be able to write. 

            Zelda
was jealous of scott's work and as we got to know them, this fell into a
regular pattern. scott would resolve not to go on all-night drinking parties
and to get some exercise each day and work regularly. he would start to work
and as soon as he was working well zelda would begin complaining about how
bored she was and get him off on another drunken party. they would quarrel and
then make up and he would sweat out the alcohol on long walks with me, and make
up his mind that this time he would really work, and would start off well. then
it would start all over again. 

            Scott
was very much in love with zelda. and he was very jealous of her. he
told me many times on our walks of how she had fallen in love with the french
navy pilot. but she had never made him really jealous with another man since.
this spring she was making him jealous with other women and on the montmartre
parties he was afraid to pass out and he was afraid to have her pass out.
becoming unconscious when they drank had always been their great defence. they
went to sleep on drinking an amount of liquor or champagne that would have
little effect on a person accustomed to drinking, and they would go to sleep
like children. i have seen them become unconscious not as though they were
drunk but as though they had been anaesthetized, and their friends, or
sometimes a taxi-driver, would get them to bed, and when they woke they would
be fresh and happy, not having taken enough alcohol to damage their bodies
before it made them unconscious. 

            Now
they had lost this natural defence. at this time zelda.  could drink more than scott could and scott
was afraid for her to pass out in the company they kept that spring and the
places they went to. scott did not like the places nor the people and he had to
drink more than he could drink and be in any control of himself, to stand the
people and the places, and then he began to have to drink to keep awake after
he would usually have passed out. finally he had few intervals of work at all. 

            He
was always trying to work. each day he would try and fail. he laid the failure
to paris, the town best organized for a. writer to write in that there is. and
he thought always that there would be some place where he and zelda could have
a good life together again. he thought of the riviera, as it was then before it
had all been built up, with the lovely stretches of blue sea and the sand
beaches and the stretches of pine woods and the mountains of the esterel going
out into the sea. he remembered it as it was when he and zelda had first found
it before people went there for the summer. 

            Scott
told me about the riviera and how my wife and i must come there' the next
summer and how we would go there and how he would find a place for us that was
not expensive and we would both work hard every day and swim and lie on the
beach and be brown and only have a single aperitif before lunch and one before
dinner. 

            Zelda
would be happy there, he said. she loved to swim and was a beautiful diver and
she was happy with that life and would want him to work and everything would be
disciplined. He and Zelda and their daughter were going to go there that
summer. i was trying to get him to write his stories as well as he could and not
trick them to conform to any formula, as he had explained that he did. 

            'You've
written a fine novel now,' i told him. 'and you mustn't write slop.' 

            'The
novel isn't selling,' he said. 'i must write stories and they have to be
stories that will sell.' 

            'Write
the best story that you can and write it as straight as you can,' 

            'I'm
going to,' he said. 

            But
the way things were going, he was lucky to get any work done at all. zelda did
not encourage the people who were chasing her and she had nothing to do with
them, she said. but it amused her and it made scott jealous and he had to go
with her to the places. it destroyed his work, and she was more jealous of his
work than anything. 

            All
that late spring and early summer scott fought to work but he could only work
in snatches. when i saw him he was always cheerful, sometimes desperately
cheerful, and he made good jokes and was a good companion. when he had very bad
times, i listened to him about them and tried to make him know that if he could
hold onto himself he would write as he was made to write, and that only death
was irrevocable. 

            He
would make fun of himself then, and as long as he could do that i thought that
he was safe. through all of this he wrote one good story, the rich boy,  and i was sure that he could write better than
that, as he did later. 

            During
the summer we were in spain and i started the first draft of a novel and
finished it back in paris in september. scott and zelda had been at cap
d'antibes, and that fall when i saw him in paris he was very changed. he had
not done any sobering up on the riviera and he was drunk now in the daytime as
well as nights. it did not make any difference any more to him that anyone was
working and he would come to 113 rue notre-dame-des-champs any time he was
drunk either in the daytime or at night. he had begun to be very rude to his
inferiors or anyone he considered his inferior. 

            One
time he came in through the sawmill gate with his small daughter - it was the
english nurse's day off and scott was caring for the child - and at the foot of
the stairs she told him she needed to go to the bathroom. scott started to
undress her and the proprietor, who lived on the floor below us, came in and
said, 'monsieur, there is a cabinet de toilette  just ahead of you to the left of the stairs.' 

            'Yes,
and i'll put your head in it too, if you're not careful,' scott told him. 

            He
was very difficult all the fall, but he had begun to work on a novel when he
was sober. i saw him rarely when he was sober, but when he was sober he was
always pleasant and he still made jokes and sometimes he would still make jokes
about himself. but when he was drunk he would usually come to find me and,
drunk, he took almost as much pleasure interfering with my work as zelda did
interfering with his. this continued for years but, for years too, i had no
more loyal friend than scott when he was sober. 

            That
fall of 1925 was upset because i would not show him the manuscriptot the first
draft of the sun also rises.* I
explained to him that it would mean nothing until i had gone over it and
rewritten it and that i did not want to discuss it or show it to anyone first.
we were going down to schruns in the vorarlberg in austria as soon as the first
snowfall there. [*published in england as fiesta.] 

            I
rewrote the first half of the manuscript there, finished it in january, i
think. i took it to new york and showed it to max perkins of scribner's and
then went back to schruns and finished rewriting the book. scott did not see it
until after the completed rewritten and cut manuscript had been sent to
scribner's at the end of april. i remembered joking with him about it and him
being worried and anxious to help as always once a thing was done. but i did
not want his help while i was rewriting. 

            While
we were living in the vorarlberg and i was finishing rewriting the novel, scott
and his wife and child had left paris for a watering place in the lower
pyrenees. zelda had been ill with that familiar intestinal complaint that too
much champagne produces and which was then diagnosed as colitis. scott was not
drinking, and starting to work, and he wanted us to come to juan-les-pins in
june. they would find an inexpensive villa for us and this time he would not
drink and it would be like the old good days and we would swim and be healthy
and brown and have one aperitif before lunch and one before dinner. zelda was
well again and they were both fine and his novel was going wonderfully. he had
money coming in from a dramatization of the great gatsby  which was running well and it would sell to
the movies and he had no worries. zelda was really fine and everything was
going to be disciplined. 

            I
had been down in madrid in may working by myself and i came by train from
bayonne to juan-les-pins third class and quite hungry because i had run out of
money stupidly and had eaten last in hendaye at the french-spanish frontier. it
was a nice villa and scott had a very fine house not far away and i was very
happy to see my wife who had the villa running beautifully, and our friends,
and the single aperitif before lunch was very good and we had several more.
that night there was a party to welcome us at the casino, just a small party,
the macleishes, the murphys, the fitzgeralds and we who were living at the
villa. no one drank anything stronger than champagne and it was very gay and
obviously a splendid place to write. there was going to be everything that a
man needed to write except to be alone. 

            Zelda
was very beautiful and was tanned a lovely gold colour and her hair was a
beautiful dark gold and she was very friendly. her hawk's eyes were clear and
calm. i knew everything was all right and was going to turn out well in the end
when she leaned forward and said to me, telling me her great secret, 'ernest,
don't you think al jolson is greater than jesus?' 

            Nobody
thought anything of it at the time. it was only zelda's secret that she shared
with me, as a hawk might share something with a man. but hawks do not share.
scott did not write anything any more that was good until after he knew that
she was insane.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–19–

A Matter of Measurements

 

 

            Much
later, in the time after zelda had what was then called her first nervous
breakdown and we happened to be in paris at the same time, scott asked me to
have lunch with him at michaud's restaurant on the corner of the rue jacob and
the rue des saints-peres. he said he had something very important to ask me
that meant more than anything in the world to him and that i must answer
absolutely truly. i said that i would do the best that i could. when he would
ask me to tell him something absolutely truly, which is very difficult to do,
and i would try it, what i said would make him angry, often not when i said it
but afterwards, and sometimes long afterwards when he had brooded on it. my
words would become something that would have to be destroyed and sometimes, if
possible, me with them. 

            He
drank wine at the lunch but it did not affect him and he had not prepared for
the lunch by drinking before it. we talked about our work and about people and
he asked me about people that we had not seen lately. i knew that he was having
great trouble with it for many reasons, but that was not what he wanted to talk
about. i kept waiting for it to come, the thing that i had to tell the absolute
truth about; but he would not bring it up until the end of the meal, as though
we were having a business lunch. 

            Finally
when we were eating the cherry tart and had a last carafe of wine he said, 

            'You
know i never slept with anyone except zelda.' 

            'no,
i didn't.' 

            'i
thought i had told you.' 

            'no.
you told me a lot of things but not that.' 

            'that
is what i have to ask you about.' 

            'good.
go on.' 

            'zelda
said that the way i was built i could never make any woman happy and that was
what upset her originally. she said it was a matter of measurements. i have
never felt the same since she said that and i have to know truly.' 

            'come
out to the office,' i said. 

            'where
is the office?' 

            'le
water,' i  said. 

            we
came back into the room and sat down at the table. 

            'you're
perfectly fine,' i said. 'you are ok. there's nothing wrong with you. you look
at yourself from above and you look foreshortened. go over to the louvre and
look at the people in the statues and then go home and look at yourself in the
mirror in profile.' 

            'those
statues may not be accurate.' 

            'they
are pretty good. most people would settle for them.' 

            'but
why would she say it?' 

            'to
put you out of business. that's the oldest way in the world of putting people
out of business. scott, you asked me to tell you the truth and i can tell you a
lot more but this is the absolute truth and all you need. you could have gone
to see a doctor.' 

            'i
didn't want to. i wanted you to tell me truly.' 

            'now
do you believe me?' 

            'i
don't know,' he said. 

            'come
on over to the louvre,' i said, 'it's just down the street and across the
river.' 

            we
went over to the louvre and he looked at the statues but still be was doubtful
about himself. 

            'it
is not basically a question of the size in repose,' i said. 'it is the size
that it becomes. it is also a question of angle.' i explained to him about
using a pillow and a few other things that might be useful for him to know. 

            'there
is one girl,' he said, 'who has been very nice to me. but after what zelda
said—' 

            'forget
what zelda said,' i told him. 'zelda is crazy. there's nothing wrong with you. 

            just
have confidence and do what the girl wants. zelda just wants to destroy you.' 

            'you
don't know anything about zelda.' 

            'all
right,' i said. 'let it go at that. but you came to lunch to ask me a question
and i've tried to give you an honest answer.' 

            but
he was still doubtful. 

            'should
we go and see some pictures?' i asked. 'have you ever seen anything in here
except the mona lisa?' 

            'i'm
not in the mood for looking at pictures,' he said. 'i promised to meet some
people at the ritz bar.' 

            many
years later at the ritz bar, long after the end of the world war ii, georges,
who is the bar chief now and who was the chasseur  when scott lived in paris, asked me, 

            'papa,
who was this monsieur fitzgerald that everyone asks me about?' 

            'didn't
you know him?' 

            'no.
i remember all of the people of that time. but now they ask me only about him.'

            what
do you tell them?' 

            'anything
interesting that they wish to hear. what will please them. but tell me, who was
he?' 

            'he
was an american writer of the early twenties and later who lived some time in
paris and abroad.' 

            'but
why would i not remember him? was he a good writer?' 

            'he
wrote two very good books and one which was not completed which those who know
his writing best say would have been very good. he also wrote some good short
stories.' 

            'did
he frequent the bar much?' 

            'i
believe so.' 

            'but
you did not come to the bar in the early twenties. i know that you were poor
then and lived in a different quarter.' 

            'when
i had money i went to the crillon.' 

            'i
know that too. i remember very well when we first met.' 

            'so
do i.' 

            'it
is strange that i have no memory of him,' georges said. 

            'all
those people are dead.' 

            'still,
one does not forget people because they are dead and people keep asking me
about him. you must tell me something about him for my memoirs.' 

            'i
will.' 

            'i
remember you and the baron von blixen arriving one night - in what year?' he
smiled. 

            'he
is dead too.' 

            'yes.
but one does not forget him. you see what i mean?' 

            'his
first wife wrote very beautifully,' i said. 'she wrote perhaps the best book
about africa that i ever read. except sir samuel baker's book on the nile
tributaries of abyssinia. put that in your memoirs. since you are interested in
writers now.' 

            'good,'
said georges. 'the baron was not a man that you forget. and the name of the
book?' 

            'out
of africa,'  i said. 'blickie was
always very proud of his first wife's writing. but we knew each other long
before she had written that book.' 

            'but
monsieur fitzgerald that they keep asking me about?' 

            'he
was in frank's time.' 

            'yes.
but i was the chasseur.  you know
what a chasseur  is.' 

            'i
am going to write something about him in a book that i will write about the
early days in paris. i promised myself that i would write it.' 

            'good,'
said georges. 

            'i
will put him in exactly as i remember him the first time that i met him.' 

            'good,'
said georges. 'then, if he came here, i will remember him. after all, one does
not forget people.' 

            'tourists?'

            'naturally.
but you say he came here very much?' 

            'it
meant very much to him.' 

            'you
write about him as you remember him and then if he came here i will remember
him.' 

            'we
will see,' i said.

A Moveable Feast
    
    
    
  

–20–

There
is Never Any End to Paris

 

 

            When
there were the three of us instead of just the two, it was the cold and the
weather that finally drove us out of Paris in the winter time. Alone there was
no problem when you got used to it. I could always go to a cafe to write and
could work all morning over a cafe creme  while the waiters cleaned and swept out the
cafe and it gradually grew warmer. My wife could go to work at the piano in a
cold place and with enough sweaters keep warm playing and come home to nurse
bumby. it was wrong to take a baby to a cafe in the winter though; even a baby
that never cried and watched everything that happened and was never bored. There
were no baby-sitters then and bumby would stay happy in his tall cage bed with
his big, loving cat named F. Puss. 

            There
were people who said that it was dangerous to leave a cat with a baby. The most
ignorant and prejudiced said that a cat would suck a baby's breath and kill
him. others said that a cat would lie on a baby and the cat's weight would
smother him. f. puss lay beside bumby in the tall cage bed and watched the door
with his big yellow eyes, and would let no one come near him when we were out
and Marie, the femme de menage, had to be away. there was no need for
baby-sitters. F. Puss was the baby-sitter. 

            But
when you are poor, and we were really poor when i had given up all journalism
when we came back from Canada, and could sell no stories at all, it was too
rough with a baby in paris in the winter. at three months mr bumby had crossed
the north atlantic on a twelve-day small cunarder that sailed from new york via
halifax in january. he never cried on the trip and laughed happily when he
would be barricaded in a bunk so he could not fall out when we were in heavy weather.
But our Paris was too cold for him. 

            We
went to schruns in the vorarlberg in austria. after going through switzerland
you came to the austrian frontier at feldkirch. the train went through
liechtenstein and stopped at bludenz where there was a small branch line that
ran along a pebbly trout river through a valley of farms and forest to schruns,
which was a sunny market town with sawmills, stores, inns and a good,
year-around hotel called the taube where we lived. 

            the
rooms at the taube were large and comfortable with big stoves, big windows and
big beds with good blankets and feather coverlets. the meals were simple and
excellent and the dining-room and the wood-planked public bar were well heated
and friendly. the valley was wide and open so there was good sun. the pension
was about two dollars a day for the three of us, and as the austrian schilling
went down with inflation, our room and food were less all the time. there was
no desperate inflation and poverty as there had been in germany. the schilling
went up and down, but its longer course was down. 

            there
were no ski-lifts from schruns and no funiculars, but there were logging trails
and cattle trails that led up different mountain valleys to the high mountain
country. 

            you
climbed on foot carrying your skis and higher up, where the snow was too deep,
you climbed on sealskins that you attached to the bottoms of the skis. at the
tops of mountain valleys there were the big alpine club huts for summer
climbers where you could sleep and leave payment for any wood you used. in some
you had to pack up your own wood, or if you were going on a long tour in the
high mountains and the glaciers, you hired someone to pack wood and supplies up
with you, and established a base. the most famous of these high base huts were
the lindauer-hutte, the madlener-haus and the wiesbadener-hutte. 

            In
back of the taube there was a sort of practice slope where you ran through
orchards and fields and there was another good slope behind tschagguns across
the valley where there was a beautiful inn with an excellent collection of
chamois horns on the walls of the drinking-room. it was from behind the lumber
village of tschagguns, which was on the far edge of the valley, that the good
skiing went all the way up until you could eventually cross the mountains and
get over the silvretta into the klosters area. 

            schruns
was a healthy place for bumby who had a dark-haired beautiful gkl to take him
out in the sun in his sleigh and look after him, and hadley and i had all the
new country to learn and the new villages, and the people of the town were very
friendly. 

            herr
walther lent who was a pioneer high-mountain skier and at one time had been a
partner with hannes schneider, the great arlberg skier, making ski-waxes for
climbing and all snow conditions, was starting a school for alpine skiing and
we both enrolled. 

            walther
lent's system was to get his pupils off the practice slopes as soon as possible
and into the high mountains on trips. skiing was not the way it is now, the
spiral fracture had not become common then, and no one could afford a broken
leg. there were no ski patrols. anything you ran down from, you had to climb
up. that gave you legs that were fit to run down with. 

            walther
lent believed the fun of skiing was to get up into the highest mountain country
where there was no one else and where the snow was untracked and then travel
from one high alpine club hut to another over the top passes and glaciers of
the alps. you must not have a binding that could break your leg if you fell.
the ski should come off before it broke your leg. what he really loved was
unroped glacier skiing, but for that we had to wait until spring when the
crevasses were sufficiently covered. 

            hadley
and i had loved skiing since we had first tried it together in switzerland and
later at cortina d'ampezzo in the dolomites when bumby was going to be born and
the doctor in milan had given her permission to continue to ski if i would
promise that she would not fall down. this took a very careful selection of
terrain and of runs and absolutely controlled running, but she had beautiful,
wonderfully strong legs and fine control of her skis, and she did not fall. we
all knew the different snow conditions and everyone knew how to run in deep
powder snow. 

            we
loved the vorarlberg and we loved schruns. we would go there about thanksgiving
time and stay until nearly easter. there was always skiing even though schruns
was not high enough for a ski resort except in a winter of heavy snow. but
climbing was fun and no one minded it in those days. you set a certain pace
well under the speed at which you could climb, and it was easy and your heart
felt good and you were proud of the weight of your rucksack. part of the climb
up to the madlener-haus was steep and very tough. but the second time you made
that climb it was easier, and finally you made it easily with double the weight
you had carried at first. 

            we
were always hungry and every mealtime was a great event. we drank light or dark
beer and new wines and wines that were a year old sometimes. the white wines
were the best. for other drinks there was kirsch made in the valley and enzian
schnapps distilled from mountain gentian. sometimes for dinner there would be
jugged hare with a rich red wine sauce, and sometimes venison with chestnut
sauce. we would drink red wine with these even though it was more expensive
than white wine, and the very best cost twenty cents a litre. ordinary red wine
was much cheaper and we packed it up in kegs to the madlener-haus. 

            we
had a store of books that sylvia beach had let us take for the winter and we
could bowl with the people of the town in the alley that gave onto the summer
garden of the hotel. once or twice a week there was a poker game in the
dining-room of the hotel with all the windows shuttered and the door locked.
gambling was forbidden in austria then and i played with herr nels, the hotel
keeper, herr lent of the alpine ski school, a banker of the town, the public
prosecutor and the captain of gendarmerie. it was a stiff game and they were
all good poker players except that herr lent played too wildly because the ski
school was not making any money. the captain of gendarmerie would raise his
finger to his ear when he would hear the pair of gendarmes stop outside the
door when they made their rounds, and we would be silent until they had gone
on. 

            in
the cold of the morning as soon as it was light the maid would come into the
room and shut the windows and make a fire in the big porcelain stove. then the
room was warm there was breakfast of fresh bread or toast with delicious fruit
preserves and big bowls of coffee, fresh eggs and good ham if you wanted it.
there was a dog named schnautz that slept on the foot of the bed who loved to
go on ski trips and to ride on my back or over my shoulder when i ran downhill.
he was mr bumby's friend too and would go for walks with him and his nurse
beside the small sleigh. 

            schruns
was a good place to work. i know because i did the most difficult job of
rewriting i have ever done there in the winter of 1925 and 1926, when i had to
take the first draft of the sun also rises  which i had written in one sprint of six weeks
and make it into a novel. i cannot remember what stories 1 wrote there. there
were several though that turned out well. 

            i
remember the snow on the road to the village squeaking at night when we walked
home in the cold with our skis and ski poles on our shoulders, watching the
lights and then finally seeing the buildings, and how everyone on the road said
'gruss gott'. there were always country men in the weinstube  with nailed boots and mountain clothes and the
air was smoky and the wooden floors were scarred by the nails. many of the
young men had served in austrian alpine regiments and one named hans, who
worked in the sawmill, was a famous hunter and we were good friends because we
had been in the same part of the mountains in italy. we drank together and we
all sang mountain songs. 

            i
remember the trails up through the orchards and the fields of the hillside
farms above the village and the warm farmhouses with their great stoves and the
huge wood piles in the snow. the women worked in the kitchens carding and
spinning wool into grey and black yarn. the spinning wheels worked by a foot
treadle and the yarn was not dyed. the black yarn was from the wool of black
sheep. the wool was natural and the fat had not been removed, and the caps and
sweaters and long scarves that hadley knitted from it never became wet in the
snow. 

            one
christmas there was a play by hans sachs that the schoolmaster directed. it was
a good play and i wrote a review of it for the provincial paper that the hotel
keeper translated. another year a former german naval officer with a shaven
head and scars came to give a lecture on the battle of jutland. the lantern
slides showed the movements of the two battle fleets and the naval officer used
a billiard cue for a pointer when he pointed out the cowardice of jellicoe, and
sometimes he became so angry that his voice broke. the schoolmaster was afraid
that he would stab the billiard cue through the screen. afterwards the former
naval officer could not quiet himself down and everyone was ill at ease in the weinstube.
 only the public prosecutor and the
banker drank with him, and they were at a separate table. herr lent, who was a
rhinelander, would not attend the lecture. there was a couple from vienna who
had come for the skiing but who did not want to go to the high mountains and so
were leaving for zurs where, i  heard, they were killed in an avalanche. the
man said the lecturer was the type of swine who had ruined germany and in
twenty years they would do it again. the woman with him told him to shut up in
french and said this is a small place and you never know. 

            that
was the year that so many people were killed in avalanches. the first big loss was
over the mountains from our valley in lech in the arlberg. a party of germans
wanted to come and ski with herr lent on their christmas vacations. snow was
late that year and the hills and mountain slopes were still warm from the sun
when a great snowfall came. the snow was deep and powdery and it was not bound
to the earth at all. conditions for skiing could not be more dangerous and herr
lent had wired the berliners not to come. but it was their vacation time and they
were ignorant and had no fear of avalanches. they arrived at lech and herr lent
refused to take them out. one man called him a coward and they said they would
ski by themselves. finally he took them to the safest slope he could find. he
crossed it himself and then they followed and the whole hillside came down in a
rush, rising over them as a tidal wave rises. 

            thirteen
were dug out and nine of them were dead. the alpine ski school had not
prospered before this, and afterwards we were almost the only members. we
became great students of avalanches, the different types of avalanches, how to
avoid them and how to behave if you were caught in one. most of the writing
that i did that year was in avalanche time. 

            the
worst thing i remember of that avalanche winter was one man who was dug out. he
had squatted down and made a box with his arms in front of his head, as we had
been taught to do, so that there would be air to breathe as the snow rose up
over you. it was a huge avalanche and it took a long time to dig everyone out,
and this man was the last to be found. he had not been dead long and his neck
was worn through so that the tendons and the bone were visible. he had been
turning his head from side to side against the pressure of the snow. in this
avalanche there must have been some old, packed snow mixed in with the new
light snow that had slipped. we could not decide whether he had done it on
purpose or if he had been out of his head. he was refused burial in consecrated
ground by the local priest anyway, since there was no proof he was a catholic. 

            when
we lived in schruns we used to make a long trip up the valley to the inn where
we slept before setting out on the climb to the madlener-haus. it was a very
beautiful old inn and the wood of the walls of the room where we ate and drank
were silky with the years of polishing. so were the table and chairs. we slept
close together in the big bed under the feather quilt with the window open and
the stars close and very bright. in the morning after breakfast we all loaded
to go up the road and started the climb in the dark with the stars close and
very bright, carrying our skis on our shoulders. the porters' skis were short
and they carried heavy loads. we competed among ourselves as to who could climb
with the heaviest loads, but no one could compete with the porters, squat
sullen peasants who spoke only montafon dialect, climbed steadily like
pack-horses and at the top, where the alpine club hut was built on a shelf
beside the snow-covered glacier, shed their loads against the stone wall of the
hut, asked for more money than the agreed price, and, when they had obtained a
compromise, shot down and away on their short skis like gnomes. 

            one
of our friends was a german girl who skied with us. she was a great mountain
skier, small and beautifully built, who could carry as heavy a rucksack as i
could and carry it longer. 

            'those
porters always look at us as though they looked forward to bringing us down as
bodies,' she said. 'they set the price for the climb and i've never known them
not to ask for more.' 

            in
the winter in schruns i wore a beard against the sun that burned my face so
badly on the high snow, and did not bother having a haircut. late one evening
running on skis down the logging trails herr lent told me that peasants i
passed on those roads above shruns called me 'the black christ'. he said some,
when they came to the weinstube,  called me 'the black kirsch-drinking christ'.
but to the peasants at the far upper end of the montafon where we hired porters
to go up to the madlener-haus, we were all foreign devils who went into the
high mountains when people should stay out of them. that we started before
daylight in order not to pass avalanche places when the sun could make them
dangerous was not to our credit. it only proved we were tricky as all foreign
devils are. 

            i
remember the smell of the pines and the sleeping on the mattresses of beech
leaves in the woodcutters' huts and the skiing through the forest following the
tracks of hares and of foxes. in the high mountains above the tree line i
remember following the track of a fox until i came in sight of him and watching
him stand with his right forefoot raised and then go carefully to stop and then
pounce, and the whiteness and the clutter of a ptarmigan bursting out of the
snow and flying away and over the ridge. 

            i
remember all the kinds of snow that the wind could make and their different
treacheries when you were on skis. then there were the blizzards when you were
in the high alpine hut and the strange world that they would make where we had
to make our route as carefully as though we had never seen the country. we had
not, either, as it all was new. finally towards spring there was the great
glacier run, smooth and straight, forever straight if our legs could hold it,
our ankles locked, we running so low, leaning into the speed, dropping forever
and forever in the silent hiss of the crisp powder. it was better than any
flying or anything else, and we built the ability to do it and to have it with the
long climbs carrying the heavy rucksacks. we could not buy the trip up nor take
a ticket to the top. it was the end we worked for all winter, and all the
winter built to make it possible. 

            during
our last year in the mountains new people came deep into our lives and nothing
was ever the same again. the winter of the avalanches was like a happy and
innocent winter in childhood compared to the next winter, a nightmare winter
disguised as the greatest fun of all, and the murderous summer that was to follow.
it was that year that the rich showed up. 

            the
rich have a sort of pilot fish who goes ahead of them, sometimes a little deaf,
sometimes a little blind, but always smelling affable and hesitant ahead of
them. the pilot fish talks like this: 'well i dont know. no of course not
really. but i like them. i like them both. yes, by god, hem; i do like them. i
see what you mean but i do like them truly and there's something damned fine
about her.' (he gives her name and pronounces it lovingly.) 'no, hem, don't be
silly and don't be difficult. i like them truly. 

            both
of them i swear it. you'll like him' (using his baby-talk nickname) 'when you
know him. i like them both, truly.' 

            then
you have the rich and nothing is ever as it was again. the pilot fish leaves of
course. he is always going somewhere, or coming from somewhere, and he is never
around for very long. he enters and leaves politics or the theatre in the same
way as he enters and leaves countries and people's lives in his early days. he
is never caught and he is not caught by the rich. nothing ever catches him and
it is only those who trust him who are caught and killed. he has the
irreplaceable early training of the bastard and a latent and long-denied love
of money. he ends up rich himself, having moved one dollar's width to the right
with every dollar that he made. 

            these
rich loved and trusted him because he was shy, comic, elusive, already in
production, and because he was an unerring pilot fish. 

            when
you have two people who love each other, are happy and gay and really good work
is being done by one or both of them, people are drawn to them as surely as
migrating birds are drawn at night to a powerful beacon. if the two people were
as solidly constructed as the beacon there would be little damage except to the
birds. 

            those
who attract people by their happiness and their performance are usually
inexperienced. they do not know how not to be overrun and how to go away. they
do not always learn about the good, the attractive, the charming, the soon-beloved,
the generous, the understanding rich who have no bad qualities and who give
each day the quality of a festival and who, when they have passed and taken the
nourishment they needed, leave everything deader than the roots of any grass
attila's horses' 

            hooves
have ever scoured. 

            the
rich came led by the pilot fish. a year before they would never have come. 

            there
was no certainty then. the work was as good and the happiness was greater but
no novel had been written, so they could not be sure. they never wasted their
time nor their charm on something that was not sure. why should they? picasso
was sure and of course had been before they had ever heard of painting. they
were very sure of another painter. many others. but this year they were sure and
they had the word from the pilot fish who turned up too so we would not feel
that they were outlanders and that i would not be difficult. the pilot fish was
our friend of course. 

            in
those days i trusted the pilot fish as i would trust the corrected hydrographic
office sailing directions for the mediterranean, say, or the tables in brown's
nauticalalmanac.  under the charm of
these rich i was as trusting and as stupid as a bird dog who wants to go out
with any man with a gun, or a trained pig in a circus who has finally found
someone who loves and appreciates him for himself alone. that every day should
be a fiesta seemed to me a marvellous discovery. i even read aloud the part of
the novel that i had rewritten, which is about as low as a writer can get and
much more dangerous for him as a writer than glacier skiing unroped before the
full winter snowfall has set over the crevices. 

            when
they said, 'it's great, ernest. truly it's great. you cannot know the thing it
has,' 

            i
wagged my tail in pleasure and plunged into the fiesta concept of life to see
if i could not bring some fine attractive stick back, instead of thinking, 'if
these bastards like it what is wrong with it?' that was what i would think if i
had been functioning as a professional although, if i had been functioning as a
professional, i would never have read it to them. 

            before
these rich had come we had already been infiltrated by another rich using the
oldest trick there is. it is that an unmarried young woman becomes the
temporary best friend of another young woman who is married, goes to live with
the husband and wife and then unknowingly, innocently and unrelentingly sets
out to marry the husband. when the husband is a writer and doing difficult work
so that he is occupied much of the time and is not a good companion or partner
to his wife for a big part of the day, the arrangement has advantages until you
know how it works out. the husband has two attractive girls around when he has
finished work. one is new and strange and if he has bad luck he gets to love
them both. 

            then,
instead of the two of them and their child, there are three of them. first it
is stimulating and fun and it goes on that way for a while. all things truly
wicked start from an innocence. so you live day by day and enjoy what you have
and do not worry. 

            you
lie and hate it and it destroys you and every day is more dangerous, but you
live day to day as in a war. 

            it
was necessary that i leave schruns and go to new york to rearrange publishers.
i did my business in new york and when i got back to paris i should have caught
the first train from the gare de 1'est that would take me down to austria. but
the girl i was in love with was in paris then, and i did not take the first
train, or the second or the third. 

            when
i saw my wife again standing by the tracks as the train came in by the piled
logs at the station, i wished i had died before i ever loved anyone but her.
she was smiling, the sun on her lovely face tanned by the snow and sun,
beautifully built, her hair red gold in the sun, grown out all winter awkwardly
and beautifully, and mr. bumby standing with her, blond and chunky and with
winter cheeks, looking like a good vorarlberg boy. 

            'oh
tatie,' she said, when i was holding her in my arms, 'you're back and you made
such a fine successful trip. i love you and we've missed you so.' 

            i
loved her and i loved no one else and we had a lovely magic time while we were
alone. i worked well and we made great trips, and i thought we were
invulnerable again, and it wasn't until we were out of the mountains in late
spring, and back in paris, that the other thing started again. 

            that
was the end of the first part of paris. paris was never to be the same again
although it was always paris and you changed as it changed. we never went back
to the vorarlberg and neither did the rich. 

            there
is never any ending to paris and the memory of each person who has lived in it
differs from that of any other. we always returned to it no matter who we were
or how it was changed or with what difficulties, or ease, it could be reached.
paris was always worth it and you received return for whatever you brought to
it. but this is how paris was in the early days when we were very poor and very
happy. 

 

 

–End–