Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events, locales, or persons, living or dead, is coincidental. 


Cover design by Anne Twomey 

Cover image by Tom Hallman 


The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book without permission is a theft of the author’s intellectual property. If you would like permission to use material from the book (other than for review purposes), please contact permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of the author’s rights. 

Grand Central Publishing 

Hachette Book Group 

1290 Avenue of the Americas 

New York, NY 10104 

grandcentralpublishing.com 

twitter.com/grandcentralpub

First ebook edition: February 2017

Grand Central Publishing is a division of Hachette Book Group, Inc. 

The Grand Central Publishing name and logo is a trademark of Hachette Book Group, Inc. 

The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their content) that are not owned by the publisher. 

The Hachette Speakers Bureau provides a wide range of authors for speaking events. To find out more, go to www.hachettespeakersbureau.com or call (866) 376-6591. 


E3-20170111_DANF

Table of Contents

Cover

Title Page

Copyright

Also by Min Jin Lee

Dedication

Book I: Gohyang/Hometown

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Book II: Motherland

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Book III: Pachinko

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Acknowledgments

About the Author

Newsletters

Reading Group Guide

Also by Min Jin Lee:

 Free Food for Millionaires

 For Christopher and Sam

BOOK I

 Gohyang/Hometown

1910–1933

 

Home is a name, a word, it is a strong one; stronger than magician  ever  spoke,  or  spirit  answered  to,  in  strongest conjuration. 

—Charles Dickens

1

Yeongdo, Busan, Korea

History has failed us, but no matter. 

At  the  turn  of  the  century,  an  aging  fisherman  and  his  wife  decided  to take  in  lodgers  for  extra  money.  Both  were  born  and  raised  in  the  fishing village of Yeongdo—a five-mile-wide islet beside the port city of Busan. In their long marriage, the wife gave birth to three sons, but only Hoonie, the eldest and the weakest one, survived. Hoonie was born with a cleft palate and a twisted foot; he was, however, endowed with hefty shoulders, a squat build, and a golden complexion. Even as a young man, he retained the mild, thoughtful  temperament  he’d  had  as  a  child.  When  Hoonie  covered  his misshapen  mouth  with  his  hands,  something  he  did  out  of  habit  meeting strangers, he resembled his nice-looking father, both having the same large, smiling eyes. Inky eyebrows graced his broad forehead, perpetually tanned from outdoor work. Like his parents, Hoonie was not a nimble talker, and some made the mistake of thinking that because he could not speak quickly there was something wrong with his mind, but that was not true. 

In  1910,  when  Hoonie  was  twenty-seven  years  old,  Japan  annexed Korea. The fisherman and his wife, thrifty and hardy peasants, refused to be distracted by the country’s incompetent aristocrats and corrupt rulers, who had  lost  their  nation  to  thieves.  When  the  rent  for  their  house  was  raised again,  the  couple  moved  out  of  their  bedroom  and  slept  in  the  anteroom near the kitchen to increase the number of lodgers. 

The wooden house they had rented for over three decades was not large, just shy of five hundred square feet. Sliding paper doors divided the interior into  three  snug  rooms,  and  the  fisherman  himself  had  replaced  its  leaky grass roof with reddish clay tiles to the benefit of his landlord, who lived in splendor in a mansion in Busan. Eventually, the kitchen was pushed out to the  vegetable  garden  to  make  way  for  the  larger  cooking  pots  and  the growing  number  of  portable  dining  tables  that  hung  on  pegs  along  the mortared stone wall. 

At his father’s insistence, Hoonie learned to read and write Korean and Japanese  from  the  village  schoolmaster  well  enough  to  keep  a boardinghouse ledger and to do sums in his head so he couldn’t be cheated at the market. When he knew how to do this, his parents pulled him out of school.  As  an  adolescent,  Hoonie  worked  nearly  as  well  as  a  strong  man twice his age with two well-shaped legs; he was dexterous with his hands and  could  carry  heavy  loads,  but  he  could  not  run  or  walk  quickly.  Both Hoonie and his father were known in the village for never picking up a cup of  wine.  The  fisherman  and  his  wife  raised  their  surviving  son,  the neighborhood cripple, to be clever and diligent, because they did not know who would care for him after they died. 

If it were possible for a man and his wife to share one heart, Hoonie was this steady, beating organ. They had lost their other sons—the youngest to measles and the middle, good-for-nothing one to a goring bull in a pointless accident.  Except  for  school  and  the  market,  the  old  couple  kept  young Hoonie close by the house, and eventually, as a young man, Hoonie needed to stay home to help his parents. They could not bear to disappoint him; yet they loved him enough not to dote on him. The peasants knew that a spoiled son did more harm to a family than a dead one, and they kept themselves from indulging him too much. 

Other  families  in  the  land  were  not  so  fortunate  as  to  have  two  such sensible  parents,  and  as  happens  in  countries  being  pillaged  by  rivals  or nature, the weak—the elderly, widows and orphans—were as desperate as ever  on  the  colonized  peninsula.  For  any  household  that  could  feed  one more, there were multitudes willing to work a full day for a bowl of barley rice. 

In the spring of 1911, two weeks after Hoonie turned twenty-eight, the red-cheeked matchmaker from town called on his mother. 

Hoonie’s mother led the matchmaker to the kitchen; they had to speak in low tones since the boarders were sleeping in the front rooms. It was late morning,  and  the  lodgers  who’d  fished  through  the  evening  had  finished their hot suppers, washed up, and gone to bed. Hoonie’s mother poured the matchmaker a cup of cold barley tea but didn’t break from her own work. 

Naturally,  the  mother  guessed  what  the  matchmaker  wanted,  but  she couldn’t fathom what to say. Hoonie had never asked his parents for a bride. 

It  was  unthinkable  that  a  decent  family  would  let  their  daughter  marry someone  with  deformities,  since  such  things  were  inevitable  in  the  next generation.  She  had  never  seen  her  son  talk  to  a  girl;  most  village  girls avoided  the  sight  of  him,  and  Hoonie  would  have  known  enough  not  to want  something  he  could  not  have—this  forbearance  was  something  that any  normal  peasant  would  have  accepted  about  his  life  and  what  he  was allowed to desire. 

The matchmaker’s funny little face was puffy and pink; black flinty eyes darted intelligently, and she was careful to say only nice things. The woman licked  her  lips  as  if  she  was  thirsty;  Hoonie’s  mother  felt  the  woman observing  her  and  every  detail  of  the  house,  measuring  the  size  of  the kitchen with her exacting eyes. 

The  matchmaker,  however,  would  have  had  great  difficulty  in  reading Hoonie’s mother, a quiet woman who worked from waking until bed, doing what was needed for that day and the next. She rarely went to the market, because  there  was  no  time  for  distracting  chatter;  she  sent  Hoonie  for  the shopping.  While  the  matchmaker  talked,  Hoonie’s  mother’s  mouth remained  unmoving  and  steady,  much  like  the  heavy  pine  table  she  was cutting her radishes on. 

The matchmaker brought it up first. So there was that unfortunate matter of  his  foot  and  broken  lip,  but  Hoonie  was  clearly  a  good  boy—educated and strong as a pair of oxen! She was blessed to have such a fine son, the matchmaker said. She deprecated her own children: Neither of her boys was dedicated  to  books  or  commerce,  but  they  were  not  terrible  boys.  Her daughter married too early and lived too far away. All good marriages, the matchmaker supposed, but her sons were lazy. Not like Hoonie. After her speech, the matchmaker stared at the olive-skinned woman whose face was immobile, casting about for any sign of interest. 

Hoonie’s  mother  kept  her  head  down,  handling  her  sharp  knife

confidently—each  cube  of  radish  was  square  and  certain.  When  a  large mound of white radish cubes formed on the cutting board, she transferred the load in a clean swipe into a mixing bowl. She was paying such careful attention to the matchmaker’s talking that privately, Hoonie’s mother feared she would begin to shake from nerves. 

Before stepping into the house, the matchmaker had walked around its perimeter  to  assess  the  financial  condition  of  the  household.  From  all appearances,  the  neighborhood  talk  of  their  stable  situation  could  be confirmed.  In  the  kitchen  garden,  ponytail  radishes,  grown  fat  and  heavy from  the  early  spring  rain,  were  ready  to  be  pulled  from  the  brown  earth. 

Pollack and squid strung neatly across a long clothesline dried in the lacy spring sun. Beside the outhouse, three black pigs were kept in a clean pen built from local stone and mortar. The matchmaker counted seven chickens and a rooster in the backyard. Their prosperity was more evident inside the house. 

In the kitchen, stacks of rice and soup bowls rested on well-built shelves, and braids of white garlic and red chilies hung from the low kitchen rafters. 

In  the  corner,  near  the  washbasin,  there  was  an  enormous  woven  basket heaped  with  freshly  dug  potatoes.  The  comforting  aroma  of  barley  and millet steaming in the black rice pot wafted through the small house. 

Satisfied  with  the  boardinghouse’s  comfortable  situation  in  a  country growing  steadily  poorer,  the  matchmaker  was  certain  that  even  Hoonie could have a healthy bride, so she plowed ahead. 

The girl was from the other side of the island, beyond the dense woods. 

Her father, a tenant farmer, was one of the many who’d lost his lease as a result  of  the  colonial  government’s  recent  land  surveys.  The  widower, cursed with four girls and no sons, had nothing to eat except for what was gathered  from  the  woods,  fish  he  couldn’t  sell,  or  the  occasional  charity from  equally  impoverished  neighbors.  The  decent  father  had  begged  the matchmaker to find grooms for his unmarried daughters, since it was better for  virgins  to  marry  anyone  than  to  scrounge  for  food  when  men  and women were hungry, and virtue was expensive. The girl, Yangjin, was the last of the four girls and the easiest to unload because she was too young to complain, and she’d had the least to eat. 

Yangjin  was  fifteen  and  mild  and  tender  as  a  newborn  calf,  the matchmaker  said.  “No  dowry,  of  course,  and  surely,  the  father  could  not

expect much in the way of gifts. Perhaps a few laying hens, cotton cloth for Yangjin’s  sisters,  six  or  seven  sacks  of  millet  to  get  them  through  the winter.”  Hearing  no  protest  at  the  tally  of  gifts,  the  matchmaker  grew bolder, “Maybe a goat. Or a small pig. The family has so little, and bride prices have come down so much. The girl wouldn’t need any jewelry.” The matchmaker laughed a little. 

With a flick of her thick wrist, Hoonie’s mother showered the radish with sea salt. The matchmaker could not have known how hard Hoonie’s mother was concentrating and thinking about what the woman wanted. The mother would have given up anything to raise the bride price demanded; Hoonie’s mother  found  herself  surprised  at  the  imaginings  and  hopes  rising  within her  breast,  but  her  face  remained  collected  and  private;  nevertheless,  the matchmaker was no fool. 

“What  I  wouldn’t  give  to  have  a  grandson  of  my  own  one  day,”  the matchmaker  said,  making  her  closing  gambit  while  peering  hard  at  the boardinghouse  keeper’s  creased,  brown  face.  “I  have  a  granddaughter  but no grandsons, and the girl cries too much.” 

The matchmaker continued. “I remember holding my first son when he was  a  baby.  How  happy  I  was!  He  was  as  white  as  a  basket  of  fresh  rice cakes on New Year’s—soft and juicy as warm dough. Tasty enough to take a bite. Well, now he’s just a big dolt,” feeling the need to add a complaint to her bragging. 

Hoonie’s mother smiled, finally, because the image was almost too vivid for  her.  What  old  woman  didn’t  yearn  to  hold  her  grandson  when  such  a thought had been inconceivable before this visit? She clenched her teeth to calm herself and picked up the mixing bowl. She shook it to even out the salt. 

“The girl has a nice face. No pockmarks. She’s well mannered and obeys her  father  and  sisters.  And  not  too  dark.  She’s  a  little  thing,  but  she  has strong hands and arms. She’ll need to gain some weight, but you understand that. It’s been a difficult time for the family.” The matchmaker smiled at the basket of potatoes in the corner as if to suggest that here, the girl would be able to eat as much as she wanted. 

Hoonie’s mother rested the bowl on the counter and turned to her guest. 

“I’ll speak to my husband and son. There’s no money for a goat or a pig. 

We  may  be  able  to  send  some  cotton  wool  with  the  other  things  for  the

winter. I’ll have to ask.” 

The bride and groom met on their wedding day, and Yangjin had not been scared  by  his  face.  Three  people  in  her  village  had  been  born  that  way. 

She’d seen cattle and pigs with the same thing. A girl who lived near her had a strawberry-like growth between her nose and split lip, and the other children  called  her  Strawberry,  a  name  the  girl  did  not  mind.  When Yangjin’s father had told her that her husband would be like Strawberry but also with a crooked leg, she had not cried. He told her that she was a good girl. 

Hoonie  and  Yangjin  were  married  so  quietly  that  if  the  family  had  not sent out mugwort cakes to the neighbors, they would have been accused of stinginess. Even the boarders were astonished when the bride appeared to serve the morning meal the day following the wedding. 

When Yangjin became pregnant, she worried that her child would have Hoonie’s  deformities.  Her  first  child  was  born  with  a  cleft  palate  but  had good legs. Hoonie and his parents were not upset when the midwife showed him to them. “Do you mind it?” Hoonie asked her, and she said no, because she  did  not.  When  Yangjin  was  alone  with  her  firstborn,  she  traced  her index  finger  around  the  infant’s  mouth  and  kissed  it;  she  had  never  loved anyone as much as her baby. At seven weeks, he died of a fever. Her second baby had a perfect face and good legs, but he, too, died before his  baek-il celebration from diarrhea and fever. Her sisters, still unmarried, blamed her weak  milk  flow  and  advised  her  to  see  a  shaman.  Hoonie  and  his  parents did not approve of the shaman, but she went without telling them when she was pregnant for the third time. Yet in the midst of her third pregnancy, she felt  odd,  and  Yangjin  resigned  herself  to  the  possibility  that  this  one,  too, may die. She lost her third to smallpox. 

Her  mother-in-law  went  to  the  herbalist  and  brewed  her  healing  teas. 

Yangjin  drank  every  brown  drop  in  the  cup  and  apologized  for  the  great expense. After each birth, Hoonie went to the market to buy his wife choice seaweed for soup to heal her womb; after each death, he brought her sweet rice cakes still warm from the market and gave them to her: “You have to eat. You must get your strength.” 

Three years after the marriage, Hoonie’s father died, then months after, his wife followed. Yangjin’s in-laws had never denied her meals or clothing. 

No  one  had  hit  her  or  criticized  her  even  as  she  failed  to  give  them  a surviving heir. 

At last, Yangjin gave birth to Sunja, her fourth child and the only girl, and the child thrived; after she turned three, the parents were able to sleep through the night without checking the pallet repeatedly to see if the small form  lying  beside  them  was  still  breathing.  Hoonie  made  his  daughter dollies  out  of  corn  husks  and  forsook  his  tobacco  to  buy  her  sweets;  the three ate each meal together even though the lodgers wanted Hoonie to eat with  them.  He  loved  his  child  the  way  his  parents  had  loved  him,  but  he found that he could not deny her anything. Sunja was a normal-looking girl with a quick laugh and bright, but to her father, she was a beauty, and he marveled  at  her  perfection.  Few  fathers  in  the  world  treasured  their daughters as much as Hoonie, who seemed to live to make his child smile. 

In  the  winter  when  Sunja  was  thirteen  years  old,  Hoonie  died  quietly from  tuberculosis.  At  his  burial,  Yangjin  and  her  daughter  were inconsolable. The next morning, the young widow rose from her pallet and returned to work. 

2

November 1932

The winter following Japan’s invasion of Manchuria was a difficult one. 

Biting  winds  sheared  through  the  small  boardinghouse,  and  the  women stuffed  cotton  in  between  the  fabric  layers  of  their  garments.  This  thing called the Depression was found everywhere in the world, the lodgers said frequently during meals, repeating what they’d overheard from the men at the market who could read newspapers. Poor Americans were as hungry as the poor Russians and the poor Chinese. In the name of the Emperor, even ordinary  Japanese  went  without.  No  doubt,  the  canny  and  the  hardy survived that winter, but the shameful reports—of children going to bed and not  waking  up,  girls  selling  their  innocence  for  a  bowl  of  wheat  noodles, and the elderly stealing away quietly to die so the young could eat—were far too plentiful. 

That said, the boarders expected their meals regularly, and an old house needed repairs. The rent had to be paid each month to the landlord’s agent, who was persistent. In time, Yangjin had learned how to handle money, deal with  her  suppliers,  and  say  no  to  terms  she  did  not  want.  She  hired  two orphaned sisters and became an employer. She was a thirty-seven-year-old widow who ran a boardinghouse and no longer the shoeless teenager who’d arrived on its doorstep clutching a set of clean undergarments wrapped in a square bit of fabric. 

Yangjin had to take care of Sunja and earn money; they were fortunate to

have this business even though they didn’t own the house. On the first of every  month,  each  lodger  paid  twenty-three  yen  for  room  and  board,  and increasingly, this was not enough to buy grain at the market or coal for heat. 

The  lodging  fees  couldn’t  go  up,  because  the  men  were  not  making  any more  money,  but  she  still  had  to  feed  them  the  same  amount.  So  from shinbones,  she  made  thick,  milky  broths  and  seasoned  the  garden vegetables for tasty side dishes; she stretched meals from millet and barley and  the  meager  things  they  had  in  the  larder  when  there  was  little  money left at the end of the month. When there wasn’t much in the grain sack, she made savory pancakes from bean flour and water. The lodgers brought her fish  they  couldn’t  sell  in  the  market,  so  when  there  was  an  extra  pail  of crabs  or  mackerel,  she  preserved  them  with  spices  to  supplement  the scantier meals that were sure to come. 

For the previous two seasons, six guests took turns sleeping in the one guest  room:  The  three  Chung  brothers  from  Jeollado  fished  at  night  and slept  during  the  day  shift,  and  two  young  fellows  from  Daegu  and  a widower from Busan worked at the seaside fish market and went to sleep in the early evening. In the small room, the men slept beside each other, but none  complained,  because  this  boardinghouse  was  better  than  what  they were used to back at their respective homes. The bedding was clean, and the food  was  filling.  The  girls  laundered  their  clothing  well,  and  the boardinghouse  keeper  patched  up  the  lodgers’  worn  work  clothes  with scraps to make them last another season. None of these men could afford a wife,  so  for  them,  this  setup  was  not  half  bad.  A  wife  could  have  given some  physical  comfort  to  a  workingman,  but  a  marriage  could  beget children  who  would  need  food,  clothing,  and  a  home;  a  poor  man’s  wife was prone to nagging and crying, and these men understood their limits. 

The  rise  in  prices  accompanied  by  the  shortage  of  money  was distressing, but the lodgers were almost never late with the rent. The men who  worked  at  the  market  were  occasionally  paid  in  unsold  goods,  and Yangjin would take a jar of cooking oil in place of a few yen on rent day. 

Her  mother-in-law  had  explained  that  you  had  to  be  very  good  to  the lodgers:  There  were  always  other  places  for  workingmen  to  stay.  She explained,  “Men  have  choices  that  women  don’t.”  At  the  end  of  each season, if there were any coins left over, Yangjin dropped them into a dark earthenware  crock  and  stowed  it  behind  a  panel  in  the  closet  where  her

husband had put away the two gold rings that had belonged to his mother. 

At  meals,  Yangjin  and  her  daughter  served  the  food  noiselessly  while  the lodgers  talked  brashly  about  politics.  The  Chung  brothers  were  illiterate, but they followed the news carefully at the docks and liked to analyze the fate of the country at the boardinghouse dining table. 

It  was  the  middle  of  November,  and  the  fishing  had  been  better  than expected  for  the  month.  The  Chung  brothers  had  just  woken  up.  The evening-shift lodgers would soon be heading home to sleep. The fishermen brothers would eat their main meal before going out to sea. Well rested and feisty, the brothers were convinced that Japan couldn’t conquer China. 

“Yes, the bastards can take a nibble, but China will not be eaten whole. 

Impossible!” exclaimed the middle Chung brother. 

“Those dwarves can’t take over such a great kingdom. China is our elder brother!  Japan  is  just  a  bad  seed,”  Fatso,  the  youngest  brother,  cried, slapping down his cup of warm tea. “China will get those sons of bitches! 

You watch!” 

The poor men mocked their powerful colonizer within the shabby walls of the boardinghouse, feeling secure from the colonial police, who wouldn’t bother  with  fishermen  with  grandiose  ideas.  The  brothers  boasted  of China’s  strengths—their  hearts  yearning  for  another  nation  to  be  strong since  their  own  rulers  had  failed  them.  Korea  had  been  colonized  for twenty-two years already. The younger two had never lived in a Korea that wasn’t ruled by Japan. 

“Ajumoni,” Fatso shouted genially. “Ajumoni.” 

“Yes?” Yangjin knew he wanted more to eat. He was a puny young man who ate more than both his brothers combined. 

“Another bowl of your delicious soup?” 

“Yes, yes, of course.” 

Yangjin retrieved it from the kitchen. Fatso slurped it down, and the men left the house for work. 

The  evening-shift  lodgers  came  home  soon  after,  washed  up,  and  ate their  suppers  quickly.  They  smoked  their  pipes,  then  went  to  sleep.  The women  cleared  the  tables  and  ate  their  simple  dinner  quietly  because  the

men  were  sleeping.  The  servant  girls  and  Sunja  tidied  the  kitchen  and cleaned the dirty washbasins. Yangjin checked the coal before she prepared for bed. The brothers’ talk of China lingered in her mind. Hoonie used to listen  carefully  to  all  the  men  who  brought  him  news,  and  he  would  nod, exhale resolutely, and then get up to take care of the chores. “No matter,” he would  say,  “no  matter.”  Whether  China  capitulated  or  avenged  itself,  the weeds  would  have  to  be  pulled  from  the  vegetable  garden,  rope  sandals would  need  to  be  woven  if  they  were  to  have  shoes,  and  the  thieves  who tried often to steal their few chickens had to be kept away. 

The dampened hem of Baek Isak’s woolen coat had frozen stiff, but at last Isak found the boardinghouse. The long trip from Pyongyang had exhausted him.  In  contrast  to  the  snowy  North,  the  cold  in  Busan  was  deceptive. 

Winter  in  the  South  appeared  milder,  but  the  frosty  wind  from  the  sea seeped into his weakened lungs and chilled him to the marrow. When he’d left home, Isak had been feeling strong enough to make the train journey, but now he felt depleted again, and he knew he had to rest. From the train station  in  Busan,  he  had  found  his  way  to  the  small  boat  that  ferried  him across to Yeongdo, and once off the boat, the coal man from the area had brought him to the door of the boardinghouse. Isak exhaled and knocked, ready  to  collapse,  believing  that  if  he  could  sleep  well  for  the  night,  he would be better in the morning. 

Yangjin had just settled onto her cotton-covered pallet when the younger servant  girl  tapped  on  the  doorframe  of  the  alcove  room  where  all  the women slept together. 

“Ajumoni, there’s a gentleman here. He wants to speak to the master of the  house.  Something  about  his  brother  who  was  here  years  ago.  The gentleman wants to stay. Tonight,” the servant girl said, breathless. 

Yangjin  frowned.  Who  would  ask  for  Hoonie?  she  wondered.  Next month would mark three years since his death. 

On  the  heated  floor,  her  daughter,  Sunja,  was  asleep  already,  snoring lightly, her loose hair crimped by the braids she’d worn during the day and spread across her pillow like a shimmering rectangle of black silk. Beside her remained just enough space for the maids to turn in when they finished

their work for the evening. 

“Didn’t you tell him that the master passed away?” 

“Yes. He seemed surprised. The gentleman said his brother had written to the master but hadn’t heard back.” 

Yangjin  sat  up  and  reached  for  the  muslin   hanbok  that  she’d  just removed,  which  was  folded  in  a  neat  pile  by  her  pillow.  She  put  on  the quilted vest over her skirt and jacket. With a few deft movements, Yangjin put her hair into a bun. 

At the sight of him, it made sense that the maid hadn’t turned him away. 

He  was  formed  like  a  young  pine,  straight  and  elegant,  and  he  was unusually  handsome:  slender  smiling  eyes,  a  strong  nose,  and  long  neck. 

The man had a pale, unlined brow, and he looked nothing like the grizzled lodgers who yelled for their food or teased the maids for being unmarried. 

The  young  man  wore  a  Western-style  suit  and  a  thick  winter  coat.  The imported leather shoes, leather suitcase, and trilby were all out of place in the small entryway. From the looks of him, the man had enough money for a room downtown in a larger inn for merchants or tradespeople. Nearly all the inns of Busan where Koreans could stay were full, but for good money, it was possible to get something. He could have passed for a rich Japanese in  the  way  he  dressed.  The  maid  stared  at  the  gentleman  with  her  mouth slightly agape, hoping he would be allowed to stay. 

Yangjin bowed, not knowing what to say to him. No doubt, the brother had sent a letter, but she did not know how to read. Once every few months, she asked the schoolmaster in town to read her mail, but she hadn’t done so this winter for lack of time. 

“Ajumoni”—he bowed—“I hope I didn’t wake you. It was dark when I got off the ferry. I didn’t know about your husband until today. I am sorry to hear  the  sad  news.  I  am  Baek  Isak.  I  come  from  Pyongyang.  My  brother Baek Yoseb stayed here many years ago.” 

His northern accent was mild, and his speech was learned. 

“I’d hoped to stay here for a few weeks before going to Osaka.” 

Yangjin looked down at her bare feet. The guestroom was already full, and a man like this would expect his own sleeping quarters. At this time of night, to find a boatman to take him back to the mainland would be hard. 

Isak  withdrew  a  white  handkerchief  from  his  trousers  and  covered  his mouth to cough. 

“My brother was here almost ten years ago. I wonder if you remember him. He had admired your husband very much.” 

Yangjin  nodded.  The  older  Baek  stood  out  in  her  memory  because  he wasn’t a fisherman or someone who worked in the market. His first name was Yoseb; he’d been named after a person in the Bible. His parents were Christians and founders of a church up north. 

“But your brother—that gentleman didn’t look like you very much. He was short, with round metal spectacles. He was headed to Japan; he stayed for several weeks before going.” 

“Yes,  yes.”  Isak’s  face  brightened.  He  hadn’t  seen  Yoseb  in  over  a decade. “He lives in Osaka with his wife. He’s the one who wrote to your husband. He insisted that I stay here. He wrote about your stewed codfish. 

‘Better than home,’ he said.” 

Yangjin smiled. How could she not? 

“Brother said your husband worked very hard.” Isak didn’t bring up the club foot or the cleft palate, though of course, Yoseb had mentioned these things  in  his  letters.  Isak  had  been  curious  to  meet  this  man  who’d overcome such difficulties. 

“Have you had dinner?” Yangjin asked. 

“I’m all right. Thank you.” 

“We could get you something to eat.” 

“Do you think I could rest here? I realize you were not expecting me, but I’ve been traveling now for two days.” 

“We don’t have an empty room, sir. This is not a big place, you see.…” 

Isak sighed, then smiled at the widow. This was his burden, not hers, and he did not want her to feel bad. He looked about for his suitcase. It was near the door. 

“Of course. Then I should return to Busan to find a place to stay. Before I  head  back,  would  you  know  of  a  boardinghouse  around  here  that  might have  a  spare  room  for  me?”  He  straightened  his  posture,  not  wanting  to appear discouraged. 

“There’s  nothing  around  here,  and  we  don’t  have  an  empty  room,” 

Yangjin  said.  If  she  put  him  with  the  others,  he  might  be  upset  about  the smell of the men. No amount of washing could remove the fish odors from their clothes. 

Isak closed his eyes and nodded. He turned to leave. 

“There’s some extra space where all the lodgers sleep. There’s only one room,  you  see.  Three  guests  sleep  during  the  day  and  three  at  night, depending  on  their  work  schedule.  There’s  just  enough  space  for  an  extra man, but it wouldn’t be comfortable. You could look in if you like.” 

“It will be fine,” Isak said, relieved. “I would be very grateful to you. I can pay you for the month.” 

“It might be more crowded than you are used to. There weren’t as many men here when your brother stayed with us. It was not so busy then. I don’t know if—” 

“No, no. I would just like a corner to lie down.” 

“It’s late, and the wind is very strong tonight.” Yangjin felt embarrassed suddenly  by  the  condition  of  her  boardinghouse,  when  she  had  never  felt this way before. If he wanted to leave the next morning, she would give him back his money, she thought. 

She  told  him  the  monthly  rate  that  had  to  be  paid  up  front.  If  he  left before the end of the month, she’d return the remainder. She charged him twenty-three  yen,  the  same  as  a  fisherman.  Isak  counted  out  the  yen  and handed them to her with both hands. 

The maid put down his bag in front of the room and went to fetch a clean bedroll from the storage cabinet. He would need hot water from the kitchen to wash. The servant girl lowered her eyes but she was curious about him. 

Yangjin  went  with  the  servant  girl  to  make  up  the  pallet,  and  Isak watched them quietly. Afterward, the maid brought him a water basin filled with warm water and a clean towel. The boys from Daegu slept side by side neatly,  and  the  widower  slept  with  his  arms  raised  over  his  head.  Isak’s pallet was parallel to the widower’s. 

In  the  morning,  the  men  would  fuss  a  little  about  having  to  share  the space with another lodger, but it wasn’t as if Yangjin could have turned him out. 

3

At dawn, the Chung brothers returned from their boat. Right away, Fatso noticed the new lodger, who remained asleep in the room. 

He grinned at Yangjin. “I’m glad to see that a hardworking lady like you is so successful. The news of your great cooking has reached the rich. Next, you’ll be taking in Japanese guests! I hope you charged him triple what we poor fellows pay.” 

Sunja  shook  her  head  at  him,  but  he  didn’t  notice.  Fatso  fingered  the necktie hanging by Isak’s suit. 

“So  is  this  what   yangban  wear  around  their  necks  to  look  important? 

Looks  like  a  noose.  I’ve  never  seen  such  a  thing  up  close!  Waaaah—

smooth!” The youngest brother rubbed the tie against his whiskers. “Maybe this is silk. A real silk noose!” He laughed out loud, but Isak did not stir. 

“Fatso-ya,  don’t  touch  that,”  said  Gombo  sternly.  The  eldest  brother’s face  was  covered  in  pockmarks,  and  when  he  was  angry,  his  pitted  skin turned  red.  Ever  since  their  father  had  died,  he  had  watched  over  his  two brothers by himself. 

Fatso let go of the tie and looked sheepish. He hated upsetting Gombo. 

The brothers bathed, ate, then all three fell asleep. The new guest continued to  sleep  beside  them,  his  slumber  punctuated  now  and  then  by  a  muffled cough. 

Yangjin  went  to  the  kitchen  to  tell  the  maids  to  look  out  for  the  new lodger  in  case  he  woke  up.  They  were  to  have  a  hot  meal  ready  for  him. 

Sunja was crouched in the corner scrubbing sweet potatoes, not looking up when her mother entered the room or when she left it. For the past week, they  had  been  speaking  only  when  necessary.  The  servant  girls  couldn’t figure out what had happened to make Sunja so quiet. 

In the late afternoon, the Chung brothers woke up, ate again, and went to the village to buy tobacco before getting on the boat. The evening lodgers had not yet returned from work, so the house was still for a couple of hours. 

The  sea  wind  seeped  through  the  porous  walls  and  around  the  window edges,  causing  a  considerable  draft  in  the  short  hallway  connecting  the rooms. 

Yangjin  was  seated  cross-legged  nearby  one  of  the  hot  spots  on  the heated floor of the alcove room where the women slept. She was mending a pair of trousers, one of the half dozen in the pile of the guests’ well-worn garments. The men’s clothes were not washed often enough, since the men owned so little and didn’t like to bother. 

“They’ll only get dirty again,” Fatso would complain, though his older brothers  preferred  them  clean.  After  laundering,  Yangjin  patched  up whatever  she  could,  and  at  least  once  a  year,  she’d  change  the  collars  of shirts  and  jackets  that  could  no  longer  be  repaired  or  cleaned.  Every  time the new lodger coughed, her head bobbed up. She tried to focus on her neat stitches  rather  than  on  her  daughter,  who  was  cleaning  the  floors  of  the house. Twice a day, the yellow wax-papered floors were swept with a short broom, then mopped by hand with a clean rag. 

The  front  door  of  the  house  opened  slowly,  and  both  mother  and daughter  looked  up  from  their  work.  Jun,  the  coal  man,  had  come  for  his money. 

Yangjin rose from the floor to meet him. Sunja bowed perfunctorily, then returned to her work. 

“How is your wife?” Yangjin asked. The coal man’s wife had a nervous stomach and was occasionally bedridden. 

“She got up early this morning and went to the market. Can’t stop that woman from making money. You know how she is,” Jun said with pride. 

“You’re  a  fortunate  man.”  Yangjin  pulled  out  her  purse  to  pay  him  for the week’s coal. 

“Ajumoni, if all my customers were like you, I’d never go hungry. You always pay when the bill is due!” He chuckled with pleasure. 

Yangjin smiled at him. Every week, he complained that no one paid on time, but most people went with less food to pay him, since it was too cold this winter not to have coal. The coal man was also a portly gentleman who took  a  cup  of  tea  and  accepted  a  snack  at  every  house  on  his  route;  he

would never starve even in such lean years. His wife was the best seaweed hawker in the market and made a tidy sum of her own. 

“Down the street, that dirty dog Lee-seki won’t cough up what he owes

—” 

“Things are not easy. Everyone’s having troubles.” 

“No,  things  are  not  easy  at  all,  but  your  house  is  full  of  paying  guests because you are the best cook in Kyungsangdo. The minister is staying with you now? Did you find him a bed? I told him your sea bream is the finest in Busan.” Jun sniffed the air, wondering if he could grab a bite of something before his next house, but he didn’t smell anything savory. 

Yangjin glanced at her daughter, and Sunja stopped cleaning the floor to go to the kitchen to fix the coal man something to eat. 

“But did you know, the young man had already heard of your cooking from  his  brother  who  stayed  ten  years  ago?  Ah,  the  belly  has  a  better memory than the heart!” 

“The minister?” Yangjin looked puzzled. 

“The  young  fellow  from  the  North.  I  met  him  last  night,  wandering around  the  streets  looking  for  your  house.  Baek  Isak.  Sort  of  a  fancy-looking fellow. I showed him your place and would have stopped in, but I had  a  late  delivery  for  Cho-seki,  who  finally  found  the  money  to  pay  me after a month of dodging—” 

“Oh—” 

“Anyway, I told the minister about my wife’s stomach troubles and how hard  she  works  at  the  stall,  and  you  know,  he  said  he  would  pray  for  her right then and there. He just dropped his head and closed his eyes! I don’t know if I believe in that mumbling that people do, but I can’t see how it can hurt anyone. Very nice-looking young man, don’t you think? Has he left for the day? I should say hello.” 

Sunja  brought  him  a  wooden  tray  holding  a  cup  of  hot  barley  tea,  a teapot, and a bowl of steamed sweet potatoes and set it before him. The coal man plopped down on the floor cushion and devoured the hot potatoes. He chewed carefully, then started to speak again. 

“So this morning, I asked the wife how she felt, and she said things were not so bad and went to work! Maybe there’s something to that praying after all. Ha!—” 

“Is he a Cath-o-lic?” Yangjin didn’t mean to interrupt him so frequently, 

but there was no other way to speak with Jun, who could have talked for hours.  For  a  man,  her  husband  used  to  say,  Jun  had  too  many  words.  “A priest?” 

“No, no. He’s not a priest. Those fellows are different. Baek is a Pro-testant. The kind that marries. He’s going to Osaka, where his brother lives. I don’t remember meeting him.” He continued to chew quietly and took small sips from his teacup. 

Before Yangjin had a chance to say anything, Jun said, “That Hirohito-seki took over our country, stole the best land, rice, fish, and now our young people.” He sighed and ate another bite of potato. “Well, I don’t blame the young  people  for  going  to  Japan.  There’s  no  money  to  be  made  here.  It’s too late for me, but if I had a son”—Jun paused, for he had no children, and it  made  him  sad  to  think  of  it—“I’d  send  him  to  Hawaii.  My  wife  has  a smart nephew who works on a sugar plantation there. The work is hard, but so what? He doesn’t work for these bastards. The other day when I went to the docks, the sons of bitches tried to tell me that I couldn’t—” 

Yangjin frowned at him for cursing. The house being so small, the girls in  the  kitchen  and  Sunja,  who  was  now  mopping  the  alcove  room,  could hear everything, and they were no doubt paying attention. 

“May I get you more tea?” 

Jun smiled and pushed his empty cup toward her with both hands. 

“It’s  our  own  damn  fault  for  losing  the  country.  I  know  that,”  he continued.  “Those  goddamn  aristocrat  sons  of  bitches  sold  us  out.  Not  a single  yangban bastard has a full set of balls.” 

Both  Yangjin  and  Sunja  knew  the  girls  in  the  kitchen  were  giggling  at the coal man’s tirade, which didn’t vary from week to week. 

“I may be a peasant, but I’m an honest workingman, and I wouldn’t have let  some  Japanese  take  over.”  He  pulled  out  a  clean,  white  handkerchief from  his  coal  dust–covered  coat  and  wiped  his  runny  nose.  “Bastards.  I better get on with my next delivery.” 

The widow asked him to wait while she went to the kitchen. At the front door, Yangjin handed Jun a fabric-tied bundle of freshly dug potatoes. One slipped  out  of  the  bundle  and  rolled  onto  the  floor.  He  pounced  on  it  and dropped it into his deep coat pockets. “Never lose what’s valuable.” 

“For your wife,” Yangjin said. “Please say hello.” 

“Thank you.” Jun slipped on his shoes in haste and left the house. 

Yangjin remained by the door watching him walk away, not going back inside until he stepped into the house next door. 

The house felt emptier without the blustering man’s lofty speeches. Sunja was  crawling  on  her  knees  finishing  up  the  hallway  connecting  the  front room with the rest of the house. The girl had a firm body like a pale block of  wood—much  in  the  shape  of  her  mother—with  great  strength  in  her dexterous  hands,  well-muscled  arms,  and  powerful  legs.  Her  short,  wide frame  was  thick,  built  for  hard  work,  with  little  delicacy  in  her  face  or limbs, but she was quite appealing physically—more handsome than pretty. 

In any setting, Sunja was noticed right away for her quick energy and bright manner.  The  lodgers  never  ceased  trying  to  woo  Sunja,  but  none  had succeeded. Her dark eyes glittered like shiny river stones set in a polished white  surface,  and  when  she  laughed,  you  couldn’t  help  but  join  her.  Her father,  Hoonie,  had  doted  on  her  from  birth,  and  even  as  a  small  child, Sunja  had  seen  it  as  her  first  duty  to  make  him  happy.  As  soon  as  she learned to walk, she’d tagged behind him like a loyal pet, and though she admired her mother, when her father died, Sunja changed from a joyful girl to a thoughtful young woman. 

None  of  the  Chung  brothers  could  afford  to  marry,  but  Gombo,  the eldest, had said on more than one occasion that a girl like Sunja would have made  a  fine  wife  for  a  man  who  wanted  to  go  up  in  the  world.  Fatso admired  her,  but  prepared  himself  to  adore  her  as  an  elder  sister-in-law, though  she  was  only  sixteen  years  old,  the  same  age  as  he.  If  any  of  the brothers  could  marry,  Gombo,  the  firstborn,  would  take  a  wife  before  the others. None of this mattered anymore, since recently Sunja had lost all of her prospects. She was pregnant, and the baby’s father was unable to marry her. A week ago, Sunja had confessed this to her mother, but, of course, no one else knew. 

“Ajumoni,  ajumoni!” the older servant girl shrieked from the front of the house,  where  the  lodgers  slept,  and  Yangjin  rushed  to  the  room.  Sunja dropped her rag to follow her. 

“There’s blood! On the pillow! And he’s soaked with sweat!” 

Bokhee, the older sister of the two servant girls, breathed deeply to calm

herself.  It  wasn’t  like  her  to  raise  her  voice,  and  she  hadn’t  meant  to frighten the others, but she didn’t know if the lodger was dead or dying, and she was too afraid to approach him. 

No  one  spoke  for  a  moment,  then  Yangjin  told  the  maid  to  leave  the room and wait by the front door. 

“It’s tuberculosis, I think,” Sunja said. 

Yangjin nodded. The lodger’s appearance reminded her of Hoonie’s last few weeks. 

“Get the pharmacist,” Yangjin told Bokhee, then changed her mind. “No, no, wait. I might need you.” 

Isak  lay  asleep  on  the  pillow,  perspiring  and  flushed,  unaware  of  the women staring down at him. Dokhee, the younger girl, had just come from the kitchen, and she gasped loudly, only to be hushed by her sister. When the lodger had arrived the night before, his ashen pallor was noticeable, but in  the  light  of  day,  his  handsome  face  was  gray—the  color  of  dirty rainwater collecting in a jar. His pillow was wet with numerous red pindots where he had coughed. 

“Uh-muh—”  Yangjin  uttered,  startled  and  anxious.  “We  have  to  move him immediately. The others could get sick. Dokhee-ya, take everything out of the storage room now. Hurry.” She would put him in the storage room, where  her  husband  had  slept  when  he  was  ill,  but  it  would  have  been  far easier if he could have walked to the back part of the house rather than her attempting to move him by herself. 

Yangjin  pulled  on  the  corner  of  the  pallet  in  an  attempt  to  jostle  him awake. 

“Pastor Baek, sir, sir!” Yangjin touched his upper arm. “Sir!” 

Finally,  Isak  opened  his  eyes.  He  couldn’t  remember  where  he  was.  In his dream, he had been home, resting near the apple orchard; the trees were a riot of white blooms. When he came to, he recognized the boardinghouse keeper. 

“Is everything all right?” 

“Do  you  have  tuberculosis?”  Yangjin  asked  him.  Surely,  he  must  have known. 

He shook his head. 

“No, I had it two years ago. I’ve been well since.” Isak touched his brow and felt the sweat along his hairline. He raised his head and found it heavy. 

“Oh, I see,” he said, seeing the red stains on the pillow. “I’m so sorry. I would not have come here if I had known that I could harm you. I should leave. I don’t want to endanger you.” Isak closed his eyes because he felt so tired. Throughout his life, Isak had been sickly, his most recent tuberculosis infection being just one of the many illnesses he’d suffered. His parents and his doctors had not wanted him to go to Osaka; only his brother Yoseb had felt  it  would  be  better  for  him,  since  Osaka  was  warmer  than  Pyongyang and  because  Yoseb  knew  how  much  Isak  didn’t  want  to  be  seen  as  an invalid, the way he had been treated for most of his life. 

“I should return home,” Isak said, his eyes still closed. 

“You’ll die on the train. You’ll get worse before getting better. Can you sit up?” Yangjin asked him. 

Isak pulled himself up and leaned against the cold wall. He had felt tired on  the  journey,  but  now  it  felt  as  if  a  bear  was  pushing  against  him.  He caught his breath and turned to the wall to cough. Blood spots marked the wall. 

“You will stay here. Until you get well,” Yangjin said. 

She  and  Sunja  looked  at  each  other.  They  had  not  gotten  sick  when Hoonie  had  this,  but  the  girls,  who  weren’t  there  then,  and  the  lodgers would have to be protected somehow. 

Yangjin looked at his face. “Can you walk a little to the back room? We would have to separate you from the others.” 

Isak  tried  to  get  up  but  couldn’t.  Yangjin  nodded.  She  told  Dokhee  to fetch the pharmacist and Bokhee to return to the kitchen to get the supper ready for the lodgers. 

Yangjin  made  him  lie  down  on  his  bedroll,  and  she  dragged  the  pallet slowly, sliding it toward the storage room, the same way she had moved her husband three years before. 

Isak mumbled, “I didn’t mean to bring you harm.” 

The  young  man  cursed  himself  privately  for  his  wish  to  see  the  world outside of his birthplace and for lying to himself that he was well enough to go to Osaka when he had sensed that he could never be cured of being so sickly. If he infected any of the people he had come into contact with, their death  would  be  on  his  head.  If  he  was  supposed  to  die,  he  hoped  to  die swiftly to spare the innocent. 

4

June 1932

At the very beginning of summer, less than six months before the young pastor  arrived  at  the  boardinghouse  and  fell  ill,  Sunja  met  the  new  fish broker, Koh Hansu. 

There was a cool edge to the marine air on the morning Sunja went to the  market  to  shop  for  the  boardinghouse.  Ever  since  she  was  an  infant strapped  to  her  mother’s  back,  she  had  gone  to  the  open-air  market  in Nampo-dong; then later, as a little girl, she’d held her father’s hand as he shuffled there, taking almost an hour each way because of his crooked foot. 

The  errand  was  more  enjoyable  with  him  than  with  her  mother,  because everyone  in  the  village  greeted  her  father  along  the  way  so  warmly. 

Hoonie’s  misshapen  mouth  and  awkward  steps  seemingly  vanished  in  the presence  of  the  neighbors’  kind  inquiries  about  the  family,  the boardinghouse,  and  the  lodgers.  Hoonie  never  said  much,  but  it  was obvious to his daughter, even then, that many sought his quiet approval—

the thoughtful gaze from his honest eyes. 

After  Hoonie  died,  Sunja  was  put  in  charge  of  shopping  for  the boardinghouse.  Her  shopping  route  didn’t  vary  from  what  she  had  been taught  by  her  mother  and  father:  first,  the  fresh  produce,  next,  the  soup bones  from  the  butcher,  then  a  few  items  from  the  market   ajumma s squatting beside spice-filled basins, deep rows of glittering cutlass fish, or plump sea bream caught hours earlier—their wares arrayed attractively on

turquoise and red waxed cloths spread on the ground. The vast market for seafood—one of the largest of its kind in Korea—stretched across the rocky beach  carpeted  with  pebbles  and  broken  bits  of  stone,  and  the   ajumma s hawked as loudly as they could, each from her square patch of tarp. 

Sunja was buying seaweed from the coal man’s wife, who sold the best quality.  The   ajumma  noticed  that  the  new  fish  broker  was  staring  at  the boardinghouse girl. 

“Shameless  man.  How  he  stares!  He’s  almost  old  enough  to  be  your father!”  The  seaweed   ajumma  rolled  her  eyes.  “Just  because  a  man’s  rich doesn’t  give  him  the  right  to  be  so  brazen  with  a  nice  girl  from  a  good family.” 

Sunja looked up and saw the new man in the light-colored Western suit and  white  leather  shoes.  He  was  standing  by  the  corrugated-tin  and  wood offices with all the other seafood brokers. Wearing an off-white Panama hat like  the  actors  in  the  movie  posters,  Koh  Hansu  stood  out  like  an  elegant bird  with  milky-white  plumage  among  the  other  men,  who  were  wearing dark clothes. He was looking hard at her, barely paying attention to the men speaking  around  him.  The  brokers  at  the  market  controlled  the  wholesale purchases of all the fish that went through there. Not only did they have the power to set the prices, they could punish any boat captain or fisherman by refusing  to  buy  his  catch;  they  also  dealt  with  the  Japanese  officials  who controlled  the  docks.  Everyone  deferred  to  the  brokers,  and  few  felt comfortable  around  them.  The  brokers  rarely  mixed  socially  outside  their group.  The  lodgers  at  the  boardinghouse  spoke  of  them  as  arrogant interlopers who made all the profits from fishing but kept the fish smell off their  smooth  white  hands.  Regardless,  the  fishermen  had  to  stay  on  good terms  with  these  men  who  had  ready  cash  for  purchases  and  the  needed advance when the catch wasn’t any good. 

“A girl like you is bound to be noticed by some fancy man, but this one seems too sharp. He’s a Jeju native but lives in Osaka. I hear he can speak perfect  Japanese.  My  husband  said  he  was  smarter  than  all  of  them  put together,  but  crafty.  Uh-muh!  He’s  still  looking  at  you!”  The  seaweed ajumma flushed red straight down to her collarbone. 

Sunja  shook  her  head,  not  wanting  to  check.  When  the  lodgers  flirted with  her,  she  ignored  them  and  did  her  work,  and  she  would  behave  no differently now. The  ajumma s at the market tended to exaggerate, anyway. 

“May I have the seaweed that my mother likes?” Sunja feigned interest in the oblong piles of dried seaweed, folded like fabric, separated in rows of varying quality and price. 

Remembering herself, the  ajumma blinked, then wrapped a large portion of  seaweed  for  Sunja.  The  girl  counted  out  the  coins,  then  accepted  the parcel with two hands. 

“Your mother is taking care of how many lodgers now?” 

“Six.” From the corner of her eye, Sunja could see that the man was now talking  to  another  broker,  but  still  looking  in  her  direction.  “She’s  very busy.” 

“Of  course  she  is!  Sunja-ya,  a  woman’s  life  is  endless  work  and suffering. There is suffering and then more suffering. It’s better to expect it, you know. You’re becoming a woman now, so you should be told this. For a woman,  the  man  you  marry  will  determine  the  quality  of  your  life completely. A good man is a decent life, and a bad man is a cursed life—but no  matter  what,  always  expect  suffering,  and  just  keep  working  hard.  No one will take care of a poor woman—just ourselves.” 

Mrs. Jun patted her perpetually bloated stomach and turned to the new customer, allowing Sunja to return home. 

At  dinner,  the  Chung  brothers  mentioned  Koh  Hansu,  who  had  just bought their entire catch. 

“For  a  broker,  he’s  okay,”  Gombo  said.  “I  prefer  a  smart  one  like  him who doesn’t suffer fools. Koh doesn’t haggle. It’s one price, and he’s fair enough. I don’t think he’s trying to screw you like the others, but you can’t refuse him.” 

Fatso  then  added  that  the  ice  broker  had  told  him  that  the  fish  broker from Jeju was supposed to be unimaginably rich. He came into Busan only three  nights  a  week  and  lived  in  Osaka  and  Seoul.  Everyone  called  him Boss. 

Koh Hansu seemed to be everywhere. Whenever she was in the market, he would turn up, not concealing his interest. Although she tried to overlook his stares and go about her errands, her face felt hot in his presence. 

A week later, he spoke to her. Sunja had just finished her shopping and

was walking alone on the road toward the ferry. 

“Young  miss,  what  are  you  cooking  for  dinner  at  the  boardinghouse tonight?” 

They were alone, but not far from the bustle of the market. 

She looked up, then walked away briskly without answering. Her heart was pounding in fear, and she hoped he wasn’t following her. On the ferry ride, she tried to recall what his voice had sounded like; it was the voice of a strong person who was trying to sound gentle. There was also the slightest Jeju lilt to his speech, a lengthening of certain vowels; it was different from how  Busan  people  talked.  He  pronounced  the  word  “dinner”  in  a  funny way, and it had taken her a moment to figure out what he was saying. 

The next day, Hansu caught up with her as she headed home. 

“Why aren’t you married? You’re old enough.” 

Sunja quickened her steps and left him again. He did not follow. 

Though  she  had  not  replied,  Hansu  didn’t  stop  trying  to  talk  to  her.  It was  one  question  always,  never  more  than  that  and  never  repeated,  but when  he  saw  her,  and  if  Sunja  was  within  hearing  distance,  he’d  say something, and she’d hurry away without saying a word. 

Hansu wasn’t put off by her lack of replies; if she had tried to keep up a banter,  he  would  have  thought  her  common.  He  liked  the  look  of  her—

glossy braided hair, a full bosom bound beneath her white, starched blouse, its long sash tied neatly, and her quick, sure-footed steps. Her young hands showed work; they were not the soft, knowing hands of a teahouse girl or the thin, pale hands of a highborn one. Her pleasant body was compact and rounded—her  upper  arms  sheathed  in  her  long  white  sleeves  appeared pillowy  and  comforting.  The  hidden  privacy  of  her  body  stirred  him;  he craved to see her skin. Neither a rich man’s daughter nor a poor man’s, the girl had something distinct in her bearing, a kind of purposefulness. Hansu had learned who she was and where she lived. Her shopping habits were the same each day. In the morning, she came to the market and left immediately afterward without dawdling. He knew that in time, they would meet. 

It was the second week of June. Sunja had finished her shopping for the day and was going home carrying a loaded basket on the crook of each arm. 

Three Japanese high school students with their uniform jackets unbuttoned were heading to the harbor to go fishing. Too hot to sit still, the boys were skipping school. When they noticed Sunja, who was going in the direction

of the Yeongdo ferry, the giggling boys surrounded her, and a skinny, pale student, the tallest of the three, plucked one of the long yellow melons out of her basket. He tossed it over Sunja’s head to his friends. 

“Give  that  back,”  Sunja  said  in  Korean  calmly,  hoping  they  weren’t getting  on  the  ferry.  These  sorts  of  incidents  happened  often  on  the mainland,  but  there  were  fewer  Japanese  in  Yeongdo.  Sunja  knew  that  it was  important  to  get  away  from  trouble  quickly.  Japanese  students  teased Korean  kids,  and  occasionally,  vice  versa.  Small  Korean  children  were warned  never  to  walk  alone,  but  Sunja  was  sixteen  and  a  strong  girl.  She assumed  that  the  Japanese  boys  must  have  mistaken  her  for  someone younger, and she tried to sound more authoritative. 

“What?  What  did  she  say?”  they  snickered  in  Japanese.  “We  don’t understand you, you smelly slut.” 

Sunja  looked  around,  but  no  one  seemed  to  be  watching  them.  The boatman by the ferry was busy talking to two other men, and the  ajumma s near the outer perimeter of the market were occupied with work. 

“Give it back now,” she said in a steady voice, and stretched out her right hand. Her basket was lodged in the crook of her elbow, and it was getting harder to keep her balance. She looked directly at the skinny boy, who stood a head taller than her. 

They  laughed  and  continued  to  mutter  in  Japanese,  and  Sunja  couldn’t understand them. Two of the boys tossed the yellow melon back and forth while the third rummaged through the basket on her left arm, which she was now afraid to put down. 

The  boys  were  about  her  age  or  younger,  but  they  were  fit  and  full  of unpredictable energy. 

The third boy, the shortest, pulled out the oxtails from the bottom of the basket. 

“Yobo s eat dogs and now they’re stealing the food of dogs! Do girls like you eat bones? You stupid bitch.” 

Sunja swiped at the air, trying to get the soup bones back. The only word she understood for certain was  yobo, which normally meant “dear” but was also a derogatory epithet used by the Japanese to describe Koreans. 

The short boy held up a bone, then sniffed it. He made a face. 

“Disgusting! How do these  yobo s eat this shit?” 

“Hey,  that’s  expensive!  Put  that  back!”  Sunja  shouted,  unable  to  keep

from crying. 

“What? I don’t understand you, you stupid Korean. Why can’t you speak Japanese? All of the Emperor’s loyal subjects are supposed to know how to speak Japanese! Aren’t you a loyal subject?” 

The  tall  one  ignored  the  others.  He  was  gauging  the  size  of  Sunja’s breasts. 

“The  yobo has really big tits. Japanese girls are delicate, not like these breeders.” 

Afraid, Sunja decided to forget the groceries and start walking, but the boys crowded her and wouldn’t let her pass. 

“Let’s squeeze her melons.” The tall one grabbed her left breast with his right hand. “Very nice and full of juice. You want a bite?” He opened his mouth wide close to her breasts. 

The short one held on to her light basket firmly so she couldn’t move, then twisted her right nipple using his index finger and thumb. 

The  third  boy  suggested,  “Let’s  take  her  somewhere  and  see  what’s beneath this long skirt. Forget fishing! She can be our catch.” 

The tall one thrust his pelvis in her direction. “How much do you want to have a taste of my eel?” 

“Let me go. I’m going to scream,” she said, but it felt like her throat was closing up. Then she saw the man standing behind the tallest boy. 

Hansu  grabbed  the  short  hairs  on  the  back  of  the  boy’s  head  with  one hand and clamped the boy’s mouth with his free hand. “Come closer,” he hissed at the others, and to their credit, they did not abandon their friend, whose eyes were wide open in terror. 

“You sons of bitches should die,” he said in perfect Japanese slang. “If you ever bother this lady again or ever show your ugly faces near this area, I will have you killed. I will have you and your families murdered by the finest  Japanese  killers  I  know,  and  no  one  will  ever  know  how  you  died. 

Your  parents  were  losers  in  Japan,  and  that’s  why  you  had  to  settle  here. 

Don’t  get  any  dumb  ideas  about  how  much  better  you  are  than  these people.” Hansu was smiling as he was saying this. “I can kill you now, and no one would do a thing, but that’s too easy. When I decide, I can have you caught, tortured, then killed. Today, I am giving you a warning because I’m gracious, and we are in front of a young lady.” 

The  two  boys  remained  silent,  watching  their  friend’s  eyes  bulge.  The

man in the ivory-colored suit and white leather shoes pulled the boy’s hair harder and harder. The boy didn’t even try to scream, because he could feel the terrifying power of the man’s unyielding force. 

The man spoke exactly like a Japanese, but the boys figured that he had to  be  Korean  from  his  actions.  They  didn’t  know  who  he  was,  but  they didn’t doubt his threats. 

“Apologize, you pieces of shit,” Hansu said to the boys. 

“We’re very sorry.” They bowed formally to her. 

She stared at them, not knowing what to do. 

They  bowed  again,  and  Hansu  released  his  grip  on  the  boy’s  hair  just slightly. 

Hansu turned to Sunja and smiled. 

“They said they are sorry. In Japanese, of course. Would you like them to apologize also in Korean? I can have them do that. I can have them write you a letter if you like.” 

Sunja shook her head. The tall boy was now crying. 

“Would you like me to throw them into the sea?” 

He was joking, but she couldn’t smile. Sunja managed to shake her head again.  The  boys  could  have  dragged  her  somewhere,  and  no  one  would have seen them go. Why wasn’t Koh Hansu afraid of the boys’ parents? A Japanese student could get a grown Korean man in trouble for certain, she thought. Why wasn’t he worried? Sunja started to cry. 

“It’s all right,” Hansu said to her in a low voice and let the tall boy go. 

The boys put the melon and the bones back in the baskets. 

“We are very sorry,” they said, bowing deeply. 

“Never ever come around here again. Do you understand, you shit-for-brains?” Hansu said in Japanese, smiling genially to make sure that Sunja did not understand his meaning. 

The  boys  bowed  again.  The  tall  one  had  peed  a  little  in  his  uniform. 

They walked in the direction of the town. 

Sunja put the baskets down on the ground and sobbed. Her forearms felt like they were going to fall off. Hansu patted her shoulder gently. 

“You live in Yeongdo.” 

She nodded. 

“Your mother owns the boardinghouse.” 

“Yes, sir.” 

“I’m going to take you home.” 

She shook her head. 

“I’ve  troubled  you  enough.  I  can  go  home  by  myself.”  Sunja  couldn’t raise her head. 

“Listen, you have to be careful not to travel alone or ever be out at night. 

If  you  go  to  the  market  by  yourself,  you  must  stay  on  the  main  paths. 

Always in public view. They are looking for girls now.” 

She didn’t understand. 

“The  colonial  government.  To  take  to  China  for  the  soldiers.  Don’t follow  anyone.  It  will  likely  be  some  Korean  person,  a  woman  or  a  man, who’ll tell you there’s a good job in China or Japan. It may be someone you know. Be careful, and I don’t mean just those stupid boys. They’re just bad kids. But even those boys could hurt you if you are not cautious. Do you understand?” 

Sunja  wasn’t  looking  for  a  job,  and  she  didn’t  understand  why  he  was telling her any of this. No one had ever approached her about working away from home. She would never leave her mother, anyway, but he was right. It was always possible for a woman to be disgraced. Noblewomen supposedly hid silver knives in their blouses to protect themselves or to commit suicide if they were dishonored. 

Hansu gave her a handkerchief, and she wiped her face. 

“You should go home. Your mother will worry.” 

Hansu walked her to the ferry. Sunja rested her baskets on the floor of the ferryboat and sat down. There were only two other passengers. 

Sunja bowed. Koh Hansu was watching her again, but this time his face was different from before; he looked concerned. As the boat moved away from the dock, she realized that she had not thanked him. 

5

As Koh Hansu was putting her on the ferry, Sunja had the opportunity to observe  him  up  close  without  distractions.  She  could  even  smell  the mentholated pomade in his neatly combed black hair. Hansu had the broad shoulders and the thick, strong torso of a larger man; his legs were not very long, but he was not short, either. Hansu was perhaps the same age as her mother, who was thirty-six. His tawny brow was creased lightly, and faded brown spots and freckles had settled on his sharp cheekbones. His nose—

narrow,  with  a  bump  below  a  high  bridge—made  him  look  somewhat Japanese,  and  small,  broken  capillaries  lay  beneath  the  skin  around  his nostrils.  More  black  than  brown,  his  dark  eyes  absorbed  light  like  a  long tunnel,  and  when  he  looked  at  her,  she  felt  an  uncomfortable  sensation  in her  stomach.  Hansu’s  Western-style  suit  was  elegant  and  well  cared  for; unlike the lodgers, he didn’t give off an odor from his labors or the sea. 

On  the  following  market  day,  she  spotted  him  standing  in  front  of  the brokers’ offices with a crowd of businessmen and waited until he could see her. She bowed to him. Hansu nodded ever so slightly, then returned to his work. Sunja went to finish her shopping, and as she walked to the ferry, he caught up with her. 

“Do you have some time?” he asked. 

She widened her eyes. What did he mean? 

“To talk.” 

Sunja  had  been  around  men  all  her  life.  She  had  never  been  afraid  of them  or  awkward  in  their  presence,  but  around  him,  she  didn’t  have  the words  she  needed.  It  was  difficult  for  her  to  stand  near  him  even.  Sunja swallowed and decided that she would speak to him no differently than to the lodgers; she was sixteen years old, not a scared child. 

“Thank you for your help the other day.” 

“It’s nothing.” 

“I should have said this earlier. Thank you.” 

“I want to talk to you. Not here.” 

“Where?” She should have asked why, she realized. 

“I’ll  come  to  the  beach  behind  your  house.  Near  the  large  black  rocks where the tide is low. You do the wash there by the cove.” He wanted her to know that he knew a little about her life. “Can you come alone?” 

Sunja looked down at her shopping baskets. She didn’t know what to tell him, but she wanted to speak with him some more. Her mother would never allow it, however. 

“Can you get away tomorrow morning? Around this time?” 

“I don’t know.” 

“Is afternoon better?” 

“After the men leave for the day, I think,” she found herself saying, her voice trailing off. 

He  was  waiting  for  her  by  the  black  rocks,  reading  a  newspaper.  The  sea was bluer than she had remembered, and the long, thin clouds seemed paler

—everything  seemed  more  vibrant  with  him  here.  The  corners  of  his newspaper fluttered with the breeze, and he grasped them firmly, but when he saw her approaching, he folded the paper and put it under his arm. He didn’t  move  toward  her,  but  let  her  come  to  him.  She  continued  to  walk steadily, a large wrapped bundle of dirty clothes balanced on her head. 

“Sir,” she said, trying not to sound afraid. She couldn’t bow, so she put her hands around the bundle to remove it, but Hansu quickly reached over to lift the load from her head, and she straightened her back as he laid the wash on the dry rocks. 

“Sir, thank you.” 

“You should call me  Oppa. You don’t have a brother, and I don’t have a sister. You can be mine.” 

Sunja said nothing. 

“This  is  nice.”  Hansu’s  eyes  searched  the  cluster  of  low  waves  in  the middle of the sea and settled on the horizon. “It’s not as beautiful as Jeju, 

but  it  has  a  similar  feeling.  You  and  I  are  from  islands.  One  day,  you’ll understand that people from islands are different. We have more freedom.” 

She liked his voice—it was a masculine, knowing voice with a trace of melancholy. 

“You’ll probably spend your entire life here.” 

“Yes,” she said. “This is my home.” 

“Home,” he said thoughtfully. “My father was an orange farmer in Jeju. 

My father and I moved to Osaka when I was twelve; I don’t think of Jeju as my home. My mother died when I was very young.” He didn’t tell her then that she looked like someone on his mother’s side of the family. It was the eyes and the open brow. 

“That’s a great deal of laundry. I used to do laundry for my father and me. I hated it. One of the greatest things about being rich is having someone else wash your clothes and cook your meals.” 

Sunja had washed clothes almost since she could walk. She didn’t mind doing laundry at all. Ironing was more difficult. 

“What do you think about when you do the laundry?” 

Hansu already knew what there was to know about the girl, but that was different from knowing her thoughts. It was his way to ask many questions when  he  wanted  to  know  someone’s  mind.  Most  people  told  you  their thoughts  in  words  and  later  confirmed  them  in  actions.  There  were  more people who told the truth than those who lied. Very few people lied well. 

What was most disappointing to him was when a person turned out to be no different  than  the  next.  He  preferred  clever  women  over  dumb  ones  and hardworking  women  over  lazy  ones  who  knew  only  how  to  lie  on  their backs. 

“When I was a boy, my father and I each owned only one suit of clothes, so when I washed our things, we would try to have them dry overnight and wore them still damp in the morning. Once—I think I was ten or eleven—I put the wet clothes near the stove to speed up the drying, and I went to cook our supper. We were having barley gruel, and I had to stir it in this cheap pot,  otherwise  the  bottom  would  burn  right  away,  and  as  I  was  stirring,  I smelled something awful, and it turned out that I had burned a large hole in my father’s jacket sleeve. I was scolded for that severely.” Hansu laughed at the memory of the thrashing he got from his father. “A head like an empty gourd!  A  worthless  idiot  for  a  son!”  His  father,  who  had  drunk  all  his

earnings,  had  never  blamed  himself  for  being  unable  to  support  them  and had  been  hard  on  his  son,  who  was  keeping  them  alive  through  foraging, hunting, and petty theft. 

Sunja had not imagined that a person like Koh Hansu could do his own laundry. His clothes were so fine and beautifully tailored. She had already seen him wear several different white suits and white shoes. No one dressed like he did. 

She had something to say. 

“When I wash clothes, I think about doing it well. It’s one of the chores I like because I can make something better than it was. It isn’t like a broken pot that you have to throw away.” 

He smiled at her. “I have wanted to be with you for a long time.” 

Again, she wanted to ask why, but it didn’t matter in a way. 

“You have a good face,” he said. “You look honest.” 

The market women had told her this before. Sunja could not haggle well and didn’t try. However, this morning she hadn’t told her mother that she was  meeting  Koh  Hansu.  She  had  not  even  told  her  about  the  Japanese students  picking  on  her.  The  night  before,  she  told  Dokhee,  who  did  the laundry  with  her,  that  she’d  do  the  wash  herself,  and  Dokhee  had  been overjoyed to get out of the task. 

“Do you have a sweetheart?” he asked. 

Her cheeks flushed. “No.” 

Hansu smiled. “You are almost seventeen. I’m thirty-four. I am exactly twice your age. I am going to be your elder brother and your friend. Hansu-oppa. Would you like that?” 

Sunja  stared  at  his  black  eyes,  thinking  that  she  had  never  wanted anything more except for the time she’d wanted her father to recover from his illness. There wasn’t a day when she didn’t think of her father or hear his voice in her head. 

“When do you do your wash?” 

“Every third day.” 

“This time?” 

She  nodded.  Sunja  breathed  deeply,  her  lungs  and  heart  filling  with anticipation  and  wonder.  She  had  always  loved  this  beach—the  unending expanse  of  pale  green  and  blue  water,  the  tiny  white  pebbles  framing  the black rocks between the water and the rocky soil. The silence here made her

safe and content. Almost no one ever came here, but now she would never see this place the same way again. 

Hansu picked up a smooth, flat stone by her foot—black with thin gray striations. From his pocket, he took out a piece of white chalk that he used to mark the wholesale containers of fish, and he made an X on the bottom of  the  stone.  He  crouched  and  felt  about  the  enormous  rocks  that surrounded  them  and  found  a  dry  crevice  in  a  medium-sized  rock,  the height of a bench. 

“If I come here and you’re not here yet, but I have to go back to work, I’ll leave this stone in the hollow of this rock so you’ll know that I came. If you’re here and I’m not, I want you to leave this stone in the same spot, so I can know that you came to see me.” 

He patted her arm and smiled at her. 

“Sunja-ya, I better go now. Let’s see each other later, okay?” 

She watched him walk away, and as soon as he was gone, she squatted and opened the bundle to begin the wash. She took a dirty shirt and soaked it in the cool water. Everything had changed. 

Three days later, she saw him. It took nothing to convince the sisters to let her do the wash by herself. Again, he was waiting by the rocks, reading the paper. He wore a light-colored hat with a black hatband. He looked elegant. 

He  acted  as  if  meeting  her  by  the  rocks  was  normal,  though  Sunja  was terrified that they might be discovered. She felt guilty that she had not told her mother, or Bokhee and Dokhee, about him. Seated on the black rocks, Hansu  and  Sunja  spoke  for  half  an  hour  or  so,  and  he  asked  her  odd questions: “What do you think about when it’s quiet and you’re not doing much?” 

There  was  never  a  time  when  she  wasn’t  doing  anything.  The boardinghouse  required  so  much  work;  Sunja  could  hardly  remember  her mother  ever  being  idle.  After  she  told  him  she  was  always  busy,  she realized she was wrong. There were times when she was working when it felt  like  the  work  was  nothing  at  all,  because  it  was  something  she  knew how to do without paying much attention. She could peel potatoes or wipe down the floors without thinking, and when she had this quiet in her mind, 

lately,  she  had  been  thinking  of  him,  but  how  could  she  say  this?  Right before he had to go, he asked her what she thought a good friend was, and she answered he was, because he had helped her when she was in trouble. 

He had smiled at that answer and stroked her hair. Every few days, they saw each  other  at  the  cove,  and  Sunja  grew  more  efficient  with  the  wash  and housework, so that no one at home noticed how she spent her time at the beach or at the market. 

Before Sunja crossed the threshold of the kitchen door to leave the house for the market or the beach, she would check her reflection on the polished metal pot lid, primping the tight braid she’d made that morning. Sunja had no idea how to make herself lovely or appealing to any man, and certainly not a man as important as Koh Hansu, so she endeavored to be clean and tidy at the least. 

The more she saw him, the more vivid he grew in her mind. His stories filled her head with people and places she had never imagined before. He lived  in  Osaka—a  large  port  city  in  Japan  where  he  said  you  could  get anything you wanted if you had money and where almost every house had electric lights and plug-in heaters to keep you warm in the winter. He said Tokyo was far busier than Seoul—with more people, shops, restaurants, and theaters.  He  had  been  to  Manchuria  and  Pyongyang.  He  described  each place  to  her  and  told  her  that  one  day  she  would  go  with  him  to  these places, but she couldn’t understand how that would ever happen. She didn’t protest, because she liked the idea of traveling with him, the idea of being with him longer than the few minutes they had at the cove. From his travels, he  brought  her  beautifully  colored  candies  and  sweet  biscuits.  He  would unwrap the candies and put one in her mouth like a mother feeding a child. 

She  had  never  tasted  such  lovely  and  delicious  treats—pink  hard  candies imported from America, butter biscuits from England. Sunja was careful to throw  away  the  wrappers  outside  the  house,  because  she  didn’t  want  her mother to know about them. 

She was enraptured by his talk and his experiences, which were far more unique  than  the  adventures  of  fishermen  or  workers  who  had  come  from far-flung places, but there was something even more new and powerful in her relationship with Hansu that she had never expected. Until she met him, Sunja had never had someone to tell about her life—the funny habits of the lodgers,  her  exchanges  with  the  sisters  who  worked  for  her  mother, 

memories of her father, and her private questions. She had someone to ask about how things worked outside of Yeongdo and Busan. Hansu was eager to  hear  about  what  went  on  in  her  day;  he  wanted  to  know  what  she dreamed  about  even.  Occasionally,  when  she  didn’t  know  how  to  handle something  or  someone,  he  told  her  what  she  could  do;  he  had  excellent ideas on how to solve problems. They never spoke of Sunja’s mother. 

At the market, it was strange to see him doing business, for he was this other person when he was with her—he was her friend, her elder brother, the one who’d lift the bundle of laundry from her head when she came to him.  “How  gracefully  you  do  that,”  he  would  remark,  admiring  how straight  and  strong  her  neck  was.  Once,  he  touched  the  nape  of  her  neck lightly  with  both  his  thick,  square  hands,  and  she  sprang  from  his  touch, shocked by the sensation she felt. 

She  wanted  to  see  him  all  the  time.  Who  else  did  he  talk  to  or  ask questions of? What did he do in the evening when she was at home serving the lodgers, polishing the low dining tables, or sleeping beside her mother? 

It felt impossible to ask him, so she kept those questions to herself. 

For  three  months,  they  met  in  the  same  way,  growing  easier  in  each other’s  company.  When  fall  arrived,  it  was  brisk  and  cold  by  the  sea,  but Sunja hardly felt the chilly air. 

Early  September,  it  rained  for  five  days  straight,  and  when  it  finally cleared, Yangjin asked Sunja to gather mushrooms at Taejongdae Forest the following morning. Sunja liked mushroom picking, and as she was about to meet  Hansu  at  the  beach,  she  felt  giddy  that  she  could  tell  him  she  was going  to  do  something  different  from  her  regular  chores.  He  traveled  and saw new things often; this was the first time she was doing something out of her normal routine. 

In  her  excitement,  she  blurted  out  her  plans  to  pick  mushrooms  right after breakfast the next day, and Hansu said nothing for a few moments and stared at her pensively. 

“Your Hansu- oppa is good at finding mushrooms and wild roots. I know a lot about the ones you can eat and the ones you can’t. When I was a boy, I spent hours searching for roots and mushrooms. In the spring, I’d look for fernbrake  and  dry  them.  I  used  to  catch  rabbits  for  our  dinner  with  a slingshot. Once, I caught a pair of pheasants before dusk—it was the first time  we  had  meat  in  a  long  time.  My  father  was  so  delighted!”  His  face

softened. 

“We  can  go  together.  How  much  time  do  you  have  to  get  the mushrooms?” he asked. 

“You want to go?” 

It  was  one  thing  to  talk  to  him  twice  a  week  for  half  an  hour,  but  she couldn’t imagine spending a day with him. What would happen if someone saw them together? Sunja’s face felt hot. What was she supposed to do? She had told him, and she couldn’t keep him from going. 

“I’ll meet you here. I better go back to the market.” Hansu smiled at her differently this time, like he was a boy, excitement beaming from his face. 

“We’ll find a huge bundle of mushrooms. I know it.” 

They walked along the outer perimeter of the island, where no one would see  them  together.  The  coastline  seemed  more  glorious  than  it  had  ever been.  As  they  approached  the  forest  located  on  the  opposite  side  of  the island, the enormous pines, maples, and firs seemed to greet them, decked in golds and reds as if they were wearing their holiday clothes. Hansu told her about living in Osaka. The Japanese were not to be vilified, he said. At this moment in time, they were beating the Koreans, and of course, no one liked losing. He believed that if the Koreans could stop quarreling with each other, they could probably take over Japan and do much worse things to the Japanese instead. 

“People are rotten everywhere you go. They’re no good. You want to see a very bad man? Make an ordinary man successful beyond his imagination. 

Let’s see how good he is when he can do whatever he wants.” 

Sunja nodded as he spoke, trying to remember his every word, to hold on to  his  every  image,  and  to  grasp  whatever  he  was  trying  to  tell  her.  She treasured his stories like the beach glass and rose-colored stones she used to collect as a girl—his words astonished her because he was taking her by the hand and showing her new, unforgettable things. 

Of course, there were many subjects and ideas she didn’t understand, and sometimes  just  trying  to  learn  it  all  without  experiencing  it  was  difficult. 

Yet she crammed her mind the way she might have overfilled a pig intestine with blood sausage stuffing. She tried hard to figure things out because she

didn’t want him to think she was ignorant. Sunja didn’t know her letters in either  Korean  or  Japanese.  Her  father  had  taught  her  some  addition  and subtraction  so  she  could  count  money,  but  that  was  all.  Both  she  and  her mother could not even write their names. 

Hansu  had  brought  a  large  kerchief  so  he  could  gather  mushrooms  as well. His obvious delight at their excursion made her feel better, but Sunja was  still  worried  that  someone  would  see  them.  No  one  knew  they  were friends. Men and women were not supposed to be that, and they were not sweethearts, either. He had never mentioned marriage, and if he wanted to marry her, he would have to speak to her mother, but he had not. In fact, after he asked her if she had a sweetheart three months before, he’d never raised the subject again. She tried not to think about what his life was like with  women.  It  would  not  have  been  difficult  for  him  to  find  a  girl  to  be with, and his interest in her did not always make sense. 

The long walk to the forest felt brief, and when they entered the woods, it felt even more isolated than the cove, but unlike the openness of the low rocks and the expanse of blue-green water, immense trees stood high above them,  and  it  was  like  entering  the  dark,  leafy  house  of  a  giant.  She  could hear  birds,  and  she  looked  up  and  about  to  see  what  kind  they  were.  She noticed Hansu’s face: There were tears in his eyes. 

“Oppa, are you all right?” 

He  nodded.  He  had  talked  for  the  entire  length  of  the  walk  about traveling  and  work,  yet  at  the  sight  of  the  colored  leaves  and  bumpy  tree trunks, Hansu fell silent. He placed his right hand on her back and touched the  end  of  her  hair  braid.  He  stroked  her  back,  then  removed  his  hand carefully. 

Hansu had not been in a forest since he was a boy—that time before he became a tough teenager who could hustle and steal with the wisest street kids  of  Osaka.  Before  he  moved  to  Japan,  the  wooded  mountains  of  Jeju had been his sanctuary; he had known every tree on the volcano Halla-san. 

He  recalled  the  small  deer  with  their  slender  legs  and  mincing,  flirtatious steps. The heavy scent of orange blossoms came back to him, though there were no such things in the woods of Yeongdo. 

“Let’s go,” he said, walking ahead, and Sunja followed him. Less than a dozen  paces  in,  he  stopped  to  pluck  a  mushroom  gently  from  the  ground. 

“That’s our first,” he said, no longer crying. 

He had not lied to her. Hansu was an expert at finding mushrooms, and he  found  numerous  edible  weeds  for  her,  even  explaining  how  to  cook them. 

“When  you’re  hungry,  you’ll  learn  what  you  can  eat  and  what  you cannot.”  He  laughed.  “I  don’t  like  being  hungry.  So,  where’s  your  spot? 

Which way?” 

“A  few  minutes  from  here—it’s  where  my  mother  used  to  pick  them after a heavy rain when she was a girl. She’s from this side of the island.” 

“Your basket is not large enough. You could have brought two and had plenty to dry for the winter! You might have to return tomorrow.” 

Sunja smiled at him. “But,  Oppa, you haven’t even seen the spot!” 

When  they  reached  her  mother’s  mushroom  spot,  it  was  carpeted  with the brown mushrooms that her father had adored. 

He  laughed,  as  pleased  as  he  could  be.  “Didn’t  I  tell  you?  We  should have brought something to make supper with. Next time, let’s plan to have lunch here. This is too easy!” Immediately, he began to gather mushrooms by the handful and threw them into the basket on the ground between them. 

When  it  grew  full,  he  put  more  into  his  handkerchief,  and  when  that  was heaping, she untied the apron around her waist and gathered more. 

“I don’t know how I will carry them all,” she said. “I’m being greedy.” 

“You are not greedy enough.” 

Hansu moved toward her. She could smell his soap and the wintergreen of his hair wax. He was cleanly shaven and handsome. She loved how white his  clothes  were.  Why  did  such  a  thing  matter?  The  men  at  the boardinghouse  could  not  help  being  filthy.  Their  work  dirtied  all  their things, and no amount of scrubbing would get the fish smell off their shirts and  pants.  Her  father  had  taught  her  not  to  judge  people  on  such  shallow points:  What  a  man  wore  or  owned  had  nothing  to  do  with  his  heart  and character.  She  inhaled  deeply,  his  scent  mingled  with  the  cleansing  air  of the forest. 

Hansu slid his hands beneath her short traditional blouse, and she did not stop him. He untied the long sash that held her blouse together and opened it. Sunja started to cry quietly, and he pulled her toward him and held her, making low, soothing sounds, and she allowed him to comfort her as he did what he wanted. He lowered her on the ground tenderly. 

“Oppa is here. It’s all right. It’s all right.” 

He had his hands firmly under her buttocks the entire time, and though he had tried to shield her from the twigs and leaves, bits of the forest had made red welts on the backs of her legs. When they separated, he used his handkerchief to clean the blood. 

“Your body is pretty. Full of juice like a ripened fruit.” 

Sunja couldn’t say anything. She had suckled him like an infant. While he was moving inside her, doing this thing that she had witnessed pigs and horses  doing,  she  was  stunned  by  how  sharp  and  bright  the  pain  was  and was grateful that the ache subsided. 

When they rose from the carpet of yellow and red leaves, he helped to straighten her undergarments, and he dressed her. 

“You are my dear girl.” 

This was what he told her when they did this again. 

6

Hansu had gone to Japan for business. He promised there would be a surprise for her when he returned. Sunja thought it would only be a matter of time before he would speak to her of marriage. She belonged to him, and she wanted to be his wife. She didn’t want to leave her mother, but if she had to move to Osaka to be with him, she would go. Throughout the day, she wondered what he was doing at that moment. When she imagined his life away from her, she felt like she was part of something else, something outside of Yeongdo, outside of Busan, and now outside of Korea even. How was it possible that she had lived without knowing anything else beyond her father and mother? Yet that was all she had known. It was right for a girl to marry  and  bear  children,  and  when  she  didn’t  menstruate,  Sunja  was pleased that she would give him a child. 

She counted the days until his return, and if there had been a clock in the house, she would have measured the hours and minutes. On the morning of his return, Sunja hurried to the market. She walked by the brokers’ offices until  he  spotted  her,  and  in  his  discreet  way,  he  set  a  meeting  time  at  the cove for the following morning. 

As soon as the lodgers left for work, Sunja gathered the laundry and ran to  the  beach,  unable  to  wait  any  longer.  When  she  saw  her  sweetheart waiting  beside  the  rocks,  wearing  a  handsome  overcoat  over  his  suit,  she felt proud that a man like this had chosen her. 

Unlike  the  other  times,  when  she  would  approach  him  in  careful, ladylike  steps,  today  she  rushed  to  him  impatiently  with  the  bundle  of laundry clutched in her arms. 

“Oppa! You’re back!” 

“I told you—I always return.” He embraced her tightly. 

“I’m so happy to see you.” 

“How is my girl?” 

She beamed in his presence. 

“I hope you won’t go away again too soon.” 

“Close your eyes,” he said, and she obeyed him. 

He opened her right hand and placed a thick disc in her palm. The metal felt cool in her hand. 

“It’s just like yours,” she said, opening her eyes. Hansu had a heavy gold pocket watch from England. Similarly sized, hers was made of silver with a gold  wash,  he  said.  A  while  back,  he’d  taught  her  the  difference  between the  long  hand  and  the  short  and  how  to  tell  time.  His  watch  hung  from  a solid gold chain with a T-bar that went through his vest buttonhole. 

“You press this.” Hansu pushed the crown and the pocket watch opened to reveal an elegant white face with curved numerals. 

“This  is  the  most  beautiful  thing  I  have  ever  seen.  Oppa,  thank  you. 

Thank you so much. Where did you get it?” She could not imagine a store where they’d sell such things. 

“If you have money, there’s nothing you can’t have. I had it ordered for you from London. Now we can know exactly when we will meet.” 

She couldn’t imagine being happier than she was at that moment. 

Hansu stroked her face and pulled her toward him. 

“I want to see you.” 

She lowered her gaze and opened her blouse. The night before, she had bathed  in  hot  water,  scrubbing  every  pore  of  her  body  until  her  skin  was red. 

He  took  the  watch  from  her  hand  and  looped  the  thin  sash  of  her  slip through its hook. 

“I’ll order a proper chain and pin the next time I am in Osaka.” 

He pushed down her inner slip to expose her breasts and put his mouth over her. He opened her long skirt. 

Her  shock  at  the  urgency  of  his  needs  had  diminished  somewhat  since the first time they made love. They had been together many times, and by now, the pain was not as great as it had been for her initially. What Sunja liked  about  lovemaking  was  the  gentle  touching  as  well  as  the  powerful desires of his body. She liked how his face changed from grave to innocent in those moments. 

When it ended, she closed her blouse. In a few moments, he would have to return to work and she would wash the boardinghouse linens. 

“I am carrying your child.” 

He opened his eyes and paused. 

“Are you certain?” 

“Yes, I think so.” 

“Well.” He smiled. 

She smiled in return, feeling proud of what they had done together. 

“Sunja—” 

“Oppa?” She studied his serious face. 

“I have a wife and three children. In Osaka.” 

Sunja opened her mouth, then closed it. She could not imagine him being with someone else. 

“I will take good care of you, but I cannot marry you. My marriage is already  registered  in  Japan.  There  are  work  implications,”  he  said, frowning. “I will do whatever I can to make sure we are together. I had been planning on finding a good house for you.” 

“A house?” 

“Near  your  mother.  Or  if  you  want,  it  can  be  in  Busan.  It’ll  be  winter soon, and we can’t keep meeting outside.” He laughed. He rubbed her upper arms, and she flinched. 

“Is that why you went to Osaka? To see your—” 

“I have been married since I was a boy nearly. I have three daughters,” 

Hansu said. His girls were neither terribly clever nor interested in much of anything, but they were sweet and simple. One was pretty enough to marry, and  the  others  were  too  skinny  like  their  nervous  mother,  who  looked fragile and perpetually bothered. 

“Maybe  it’s  a  son  you’re  carrying!”  He  couldn’t  help  but  smile  at  the thought.  “How  do  you  feel?  Is  there  anything  you  feel  like  eating?”  He pulled  out  his  wallet  and  withdrew  a  stack  of  yen  bills.  “You  should  buy whatever  you  want  to  eat.  Also,  you’ll  need  more  fabric  for  clothing  for yourself and for the child.” 

She stared at the money but didn’t reach for it. Her hands hung by her side. He sounded increasingly excited. 

“Do you feel different?” He put his hands on her stomach and laughed with delight. 

Hansu’s  wife,  who  was  two  years  older  than  he  was,  hadn’t  been pregnant in years; they rarely made love. As recently as a year ago, when he had  a  string  of  mistresses,  none  had  even  missed  a  period,  so  he  hadn’t given much thought to Sunja having a child. Hansu had planned on getting Sunja  a  small  house  before  winter,  but  now  he’d  find  something  much larger. The girl was young and obviously fertile, so he realized they could have more children. He felt happy at the prospect of having a woman and children  in  Korea.  He  was  no  longer  a  young  man,  but  his  desires  for lovemaking  had  not  declined  with  age.  While  he’d  been  away,  he’d masturbated  thinking  about  her.  Hansu  did  not  believe  that  man  was designed to have sex with only one woman; marriage was unnatural to him, but  he  would  never  abandon  a  woman  who  had  borne  him  children.  He thought a man may need a number of women, but he found that he preferred this  one  girl.  He  loved  the  sturdiness  of  Sunja’s  body,  the  fullness  of  her bosom and hips. Her soft face comforted him, and he had come to depend on her innocence and adoration. After being with her, Hansu felt like there was little he couldn’t do. It was true after all: Being with a young girl made a man feel like a boy again. He pressed the money into Sunja’s hand, but she  let  the  bills  drop  and  scatter  on  the  beach.  Hansu  bent  down  to  pick them up. 

“What are you doing?” He raised his voice a little. 

Sunja looked away from him. He was saying something, but she couldn’t hear what it was. It was as if her mind would no longer interpret his words with meaning. His talk was just sounds, beats of noise. Nothing made sense. 

He had a wife and three daughters in Japan? Since she had met him, he had been  straightforward,  she  supposed.  Every  promise  he’d  ever  made  had been kept. He said there would be a surprise, and he had brought a watch for her, but the surprise she had for him, she no longer wanted him to know. 

Nothing about him had ever made her suspect that he was a  jebi—a kind of man  who  could  flit  from  one  woman  to  another.  Did  he  make  love  to  his wife, too? What did she know about men, anyway? 

What was the wife like? Sunja wanted to know. Was she beautiful? Was she  kind?  Sunja  could  not  look  at  his  face  anymore.  She  glanced  at  her white muslin skirt, its tattered hem remaining gray no matter how much she tried to clean it. 

“Sunja, when can I go to speak to your mother? Should we go speak to

her now? Does she know about the baby?” 

It felt like a slap when he mentioned her mother. 

“My mother?” 

“Yes, have you told her?” 

“No. No, I have not told her.” Sunja tried not to think of her mother. 

“I will buy that boardinghouse for you, and your mother and you won’t have  to  keep  lodgers  anymore.  You  could  just  take  care  of  the  child.  We could have more children. You could get a much bigger house if you like.” 

The bundle of laundry by her foot seemed to glow in the sun. There was work to do for the day. She was a foolish peasant girl who’d let a man take her on the grounds of a forest. When he had wanted her in the open air of the beach, she had let him have her body as much as he liked. But she had believed that he loved her as she loved him. If he did not marry her, she was a common slut who would be disgraced forever. The child would be another no-name  bastard.  Her  mother’s  boardinghouse  would  be  contaminated  by her shame. There was a baby inside her belly, and this child would not have a real father like the one she’d had. 

“I will never see you again,” she said. 

“What?”  Hansu  smiled  in  disbelief.  He  put  his  arms  on  her  shoulders, and she shrugged him off. 

“If you ever come near me again, I will kill myself. I may have behaved like a whore—” Sunja couldn’t speak anymore. She could see her father so clearly: his beautiful eyes, broken lip, his hunched and delayed gait. When he  finished  his  long  day’s  work,  he  would  carve  her  dolls  out  of  dried corncobs and branches. If there was a brass coin left in his pocket, he’d buy her a piece of taffy. It was better that he was dead so he would not see what a filthy creature she had become. He had taught her to respect herself, and she had not. She had betrayed her mother and father, who had done nothing but work hard and take care of her like a jewel. 

“Sunja,  my  dear  child.  What  is  upsetting  you?  Nothing  has  changed.” 

Hansu was confused. “I will take excellent care of you and the baby. There is money and time for another family. I will honor my obligations. My love for you is very strong; it is stronger than I had ever expected. I don’t say this  lightly,  but  if  I  could,  I  would  marry  you.  You  are  someone  I  would marry. You and I, we are alike. Our child will be deeply loved, but I cannot forget my wife and three girls—” 

“You never told me about them. You made me think—” 

Hansu  shook  his  head.  The  girl  had  never  opposed  him  before;  he  had never heard a contrary word from her lips. 

“I will not see you again,” she said

He tried to hold her, and Sunja shouted, “Get away from me, you son of a bitch! I want to have nothing to do with you.” 

Hansu stopped and looked at her, needing to reevaluate the girl standing in front of him. The fire in her body had never been expressed in words, and now he knew she could be different. 

“You  don’t  care  about  me.  Not  really.”  Sunja  felt  clear  suddenly.  She expected him to treat her the way her own parents had treated her. She felt certain her father and mother would have preferred her to have any honest job than to be a rich man’s mistress. “And what will you do if the child is a girl?  Or  what  if  she  is  born  like  my  father?  With  a  mangled  foot  and  no upper lip?” 

“Is that why you have not married?” Hansu furrowed his brow. 

Sunja’s mother had never pushed the idea of marriage when many girls in her village had married well before her. No one had come to her mother with  proposals,  and  the  lodgers  who  flirted  with  her  were  not  serious prospects.  Perhaps  this  was  why,  Sunja  wondered.  Now  that  she  was pregnant, it dawned on her that she could give birth to a child who had her father’s deformities. Every year, she cleaned the graves of her siblings; her mother had told her that several had been born with cleft palates. He was expecting a healthy son, but how about if she couldn’t produce one? Would he discard them? 

“Were you trying to get me to marry you? Because you couldn’t marry a normal fellow?” 

Even Hansu realized the cruelty of his own words. 

Sunja grabbed her bundle and ran home. 

7

Pharmacist Chu had grown fond of the pastor from Pyongyang and was pleased to see his recovery. He visited Isak only once a week now, and the young man seemed completely well. 

“You’re too healthy to be in bed,” the pharmacist said. “But don’t get up just yet.” Chu was seated beside Isak, who was lying flat on a bedroll in the storage closet. The draft from the gaps around the windowsill lifted Chu’s white  forelocks  slightly.  He  placed  the  thick  quilt  over  Isak’s  shoulders. 

“You’re warm enough?” 

“Yes. I’m indebted to you and  ajumoni.” 

“You still look too thin.” Chu frowned. “I want to see you stout. There’s no curve to your face. Don’t you like the food here?” 

The boardinghouse keeper looked as if she’d been scolded. 

“The meals have been wonderful,” Isak protested. “I’m eating far more than what I pay in board. The food here is better than at home.” Isak smiled at Yangjin and Sunja, who were standing in the hallway. 

Chu  leaned  in  to  Isak’s  chest,  where  he  had  placed  the  bell  of  his stethoscope.  The  breathing  sounded  strong  and  even,  similar  to  the  week before. The pastor seemed very fit. 

“Make a coughing sound.” 

Chu  listened  thoughtfully  to  the  timbre  of  the  pastor’s  chest.  “You’ve improved  for  certain,  but  you’ve  been  ill  most  of  your  life.  And  you  had tuberculosis before. We need to be vigilant.” 

“Yes, but I feel strong now. Sir, I’d like to write to my church in Osaka to  let  them  know  my  travel  dates.  That  is,  if  you  think  I  can  travel.  My brother made me promise that I’d get your permission first.” Isak closed his eyes as if in prayer. 

“Before you left Pyongyang, did your doctor think you could travel all the way to Osaka by yourself?” 

“I  was  told  that  I  could  travel,  but  the  doctor  and  my  mother  didn’t encourage my leaving home. But I was the strongest I’d ever been when I left.  But  of  course,  since  being  here  like  this—no  doubt,  I  should’ve listened to them. It’s just that the church in Osaka wanted me to come.” 

“Your  doctor  told  you  not  to  go,  but  you  went  anyway.”  Chu  laughed. 

“Young men can’t be locked up, I suppose. So now you want to head out again,  and  this  time  you  want  my  permission.  How  would  it  look  if something  happened  to  you  on  the  way,  or  if  you  got  sick  when  you  got there?” Chu shook his head and sighed. “What can I say? I cannot stop you, but I think you should wait.” 

“How long?” 

“At least two more weeks. Maybe three.” 

Isak glanced up at Yangjin and Sunja. He was embarrassed. 

“I feel terrible that I’ve burdened you and put you at risk. Thank God no one has gotten sick. I’m so sorry. For everything.” 

Yangjin shook her head. The pastor had been a model guest; if anything, the  other  lodgers  had  improved  their  behavior  in  the  proximity  of  such  a well-mannered person. He had paid his bills on time. She was relieved that his health had improved so dramatically. 

Chu put away his stethoscope. 

“I’m  in  no  rush  for  you  to  return  home,  however.  The  weather  here  is better for your lungs compared to the North, and the weather in Osaka will be similar to the weather here. The winters are not as severe in Japan,” Chu said. 

Isak nodded. The climate had been a major consideration for his parents’

consent for Isak to go to Osaka. 

“Then, may I write the church in Osaka? And my brother?” 

“You’ll  take  the  boat  to  Shimonoseki  and  then  the  train?”  Chu  asked, making a face. The journey would take a day, two at the most with delays. 

Isak  nodded,  relieved  that  the  pharmacist  was  signaling  that  he  could leave. 

“Have you been going out?” 

“Not beyond the yard. You’d said that it wasn’t a good idea.” 

“Well, you can now. You should take a good walk or two every day—

each  one  longer  than  the  one  before  it.  You  need  to  strengthen  your  legs. 

You’re  young,  but  you’ve  been  in  bed  and  in  the  house  for  almost  three months.” The pharmacist turned to Yangjin. “See if he can make it as far as the  market.  He  shouldn’t  go  alone  obviously.  He  could  fall.”  Chu  patted Isak  on  the  shoulder  before  going  and  promised  to  return  the  following week. 

The  next  morning,  Isak  finished  his  Bible  study  and  prayers,  then  ate  his breakfast in the front room by himself. The lodgers had already gone out for the  day.  He  felt  strong  enough  to  go  to  Osaka,  and  he  wanted  to  make preparations to leave. Before heading out to Japan, he had wanted to visit the pastor of a church in Busan, but there had been no chance for that. He hadn’t contacted him for fear that he’d stop by and get sick. Isak’s legs felt okay,  not  wobbly  as  before.  In  his  room,  he  had  been  doing  light calisthenics that his eldest brother, Samoel, had taught him when he was a boy. Having spent most of his life indoors, he’d had to learn how to keep fit in less obvious ways. 

Yangjin came to clear his breakfast tray. She brought him barley tea, and he thanked her. 

“I think I’d like to take a walk. I can go by myself,” he said, smiling. “It wouldn’t be for long. I feel very well this morning. I won’t go far.” 

Yangjin couldn’t keep her face blank. She couldn’t keep him cooped up like a prized rooster in her henhouse, but what would happen if he fell? The area  near  her  house  was  desolate.  If  he  walked  by  the  beach  and  had  an accident, no one would see him. 

“I don’t think you should go by yourself, sir.” The lodgers were at work or in town doing things she didn’t want to know about. There was no one to ask to accompany him at the moment. 

Isak  bit  his  lip.  If  he  didn’t  strengthen  his  legs,  the  journey  would  be delayed. 

“It  would  be  a  big  imposition.”  He  paused.  “You  have  a  great  deal  of work, but perhaps you can take me for just a short while.” It was outrageous to ask a woman to walk with him on the beach, but Isak felt he’d go insane if he didn’t walk outside today. “If you cannot go, I understand. I will take a

very short walk near the water. For a few minutes.” 

As  a  boy,  he  had  lived  the  life  of  a  privileged  invalid.  Tutors  and servants had been his primary companions. When it was good weather and he  wasn’t  well  enough  to  walk,  the  servants  or  his  elder  brothers  used  to carry him on their backs. If the doctor wanted him to get air, the blade-thin gardener  would  put  Isak  in  an  A-frame  and  stroll  through  the  orchard, letting  the  child  pull  off  the  apples  from  the  lower  branches.  Isak  could almost  smell  the  heady  perfume  of  the  apples,  feel  the  weight  of  the  red fruit in his hands and taste the sweet crunch of the first bite, its pale juice running down his wrist. He missed home, and he felt like a sick child again, stuck in his room, begging for permission to see the sunlight. 

Yangjin was seated on her knees with her small, coarse hands folded in her  lap,  not  knowing  what  to  say.  It  was  not  appropriate  for  a  woman  to walk with a man who wasn’t a member of her family. She was older than he was, so she didn’t fear any gossip, but Yangjin had never walked alongside a man who wasn’t her father or husband. 

He  peered  into  her  troubled  face.  He  felt  awful  for  making  another imposition. 

“You’ve already done so much, and I’m asking for more.” 

Yangjin straightened her back. She’d never gone on a leisurely walk on the  beach  with  her  husband.  Hoonie’s  legs  and  back  had  given  him profound pain throughout his brief life—he had not complained of it, but he would conserve his energies for the work he had to get done. How much he must have wanted to run as a normal boy, swallow lungfuls of salty air and chase the seagulls—things nearly every child in Yeongdo had done growing up. 

“There  is  something  very  selfish  in  me,”  he  said.  “I’m  sorry.”  Isak decided to wait until one of the lodgers could take him out. 

Yangjin got up. “You’ll need your coat,” she said. “I’ll get it.” 

The heavy scent of seaweed, the foamy lather of the waves along the rocky beach, and the emptiness of the blue-and-gray landscape but for the white circling  birds  above  them—the  sensations  were  almost  too  much  to  bear after being in that tiny room for so long. The morning sun warmed Isak’s

uncovered  head.  He  had  never  been  drunk  on  wine,  but  he  imagined  that this was how the farmers must have felt dancing during  Chuseok after too many cups. 

On  the  beach,  Isak  carried  his  leather  shoes  in  his  hands.  He  walked steadily,  not  feeling  any  trace  of  illness  within  his  tall,  gaunt  frame.  He didn’t feel strong, but he felt better than he’d been. 

“Thank  you,”  he  said,  without  looking  in  her  direction.  His  pale  face shone in the morning light. He closed his eyes and inhaled deeply. 

Yangjin glanced at the smiling young man. He possessed an innocence, she  supposed,  a  kind  of  childlike  wholeness  that  couldn’t  be  hidden.  She wanted to protect him. 

“You have been so kind.” 

She  dismissed  this  with  a  wave,  not  knowing  what  to  do  with  his gratitude. Yangjin was miserable. She had no time for this walk, and being outside made the dull weight in her heart take a definable shape; it pressed against her from the inside. 

“May I ask you something?” 

“Hmm?” 

“Is your daughter all right?” 

Yangjin didn’t answer. As they were walking toward the other end of the beach,  she’d  been  feeling  as  if  she  were  somewhere  else,  though  she couldn’t say where exactly. This place didn’t feel like the beach behind her house, just a few paces from her backyard. Being with the young pastor was disorienting, yet his unexpected question broke the gauzy spell. What had he  noticed  for  him  to  ask  about  Sunja?  Soon,  her  rising  belly  would  be obvious,  but  she  didn’t  look  very  different  now.  What  would  the  pastor think of this? Did it matter? 

“She’s  pregnant.”  She  said  this,  and  she  knew  it  would  be  okay  to  tell him. 

“It must be difficult for her with her husband being away.” 

“She doesn’t have a husband.” 

It  wouldn’t  have  been  unusual  for  him  to  think  that  the  child’s  father worked in Japan in a mine or a factory. 

“Is the man…?” 

“She won’t say anything.” Sunja had told her that the man was already married and had children. Yangjin didn’t know anything else. She couldn’t

tell the pastor, however; it was too shameful. 

The  woman  looked  hopeless.  The  lodgers  brought  Isak  newspapers  to read  aloud  for  them,  and  lately,  every  story  was  a  sad  one.  He  felt  an overwhelming  sense  of  brokenness  in  the  people.  The  country  had  been under the colonial government for over two decades, and no one could see an end in sight. It felt like everyone had given up. 

“These things happen in all families.” 

“I don’t know what will happen to her. Her life is ruined. It would have been difficult for her to marry before, but now…” 

He didn’t understand. 

“My husband’s condition. People don’t want that in the bloodline.” 

“I see.” 

“It’s  a  difficult  thing  to  be  an  unmarried  woman,  but  to  bear  a  child without  a  husband—  The  neighbors  will  never  approve.  And  what  will happen to this baby who has no name? He cannot be registered under our family  name.”  She  had  never  talked  so  freely  to  a  stranger.  Yangjin continued to walk, but her pace slowed. 

Since  learning  the  news,  she  had  tried  to  think  of  any  possible  way  to make  this  easier,  but  could  not  come  up  with  anything.  Her  unmarried sisters  couldn’t  help  her,  and  their  father  had  died  long  ago.  She  had  no brothers. 

Isak was surprised, but not so much. He had seen this before at his home church.  You  saw  all  sorts  of  things  in  a  church  where  forgiveness  was expected. 

“The father of the child—he’s nowhere to be found?” 

“I don’t know. She won’t speak of him. I haven’t told anyone except for you. I know it’s your job to counsel people, but we aren’t Christians. I’m sorry.” 

“You saved my life. I would have died if you had not taken me in and nursed me. You’ve gone far beyond what an innkeeper does for his guest.” 

“My husband died of this thing. You’re a young man. You should live a long life.” 

They continued to walk, and Yangjin did not seem interested in turning around.  She  stared  at  the  light  green–colored  water.  She  felt  like  sitting down; she was so tired suddenly. 

“Can she know that I know? May I speak with her?” 

“You’re not shocked?” 

“Of course not. Sunja seems like a very responsible young woman; there must be some reason for this.  Ajumoni, this must feel very terrible now, but a child is a gift from God.” 

There was no change in Yangjin’s sad expression. 

“Ajumoni, do you believe in God?” 

She  shook  her  head  no.  “My  husband  said  Christians  were  not  bad people. Some were patriots who fought for independence. Right?” 

“Yes,  my  teachers  at  the  seminary  in  Pyongyang  fought  for independence. My oldest brother died in 1919.” 

“Are you political, too?” She looked concerned; Hoonie had told her that they  should  avoid  housing  activists  because  it  would  be  dangerous.  “Like your brother?” 

“My brother Samoel was a pastor. He led me to Christ. My brother was a brilliant man. Fearless and kind.” 

Yangjin  nodded.  Hoonie  had  wanted  independence  for  Korea,  but  he believed that a man had to care for his family first. 

“My husband didn’t want us to follow anyone—not Jesus, not Buddha, not an emperor or even a Korean leader.” 

“I understand. I do.” 

“So many terrible things are happening here.” 

“God  controls  all  things,  but  we  don’t  understand  his  reasons. 

Sometimes, I don’t like his actions, either. It’s frustrating.” 

Yangjin shrugged. 

“And we know that God causes all things to work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to his purpose,” Isak said, reciting a favorite verse, but he could see that Yangjin was unmoved, and it occurred to him that she and her daughter could not love God if they did not know him. 

“I am sorry that you are suffering. I’m not a parent, but I think parents hurt with their children.” 

The boardinghouse keeper was lost in her sadness. 

“I’m glad you had a chance to walk a little today,” she said. 

“If you don’t believe, I understand,” he said. 

“Does your family observe  jesa?” 

“No.” Isak smiled. No one in his family observed the rituals for the dead. 

The Protestants he knew didn’t, either. 

“My husband thought it was unnecessary. He told me so, but I still make his favorite foods and prepare a shrine for him. I do it for his parents and my own. His parents thought it was important. They were very good to me. 

I clean their graves and the ones for all my dead babies. I talk to the dead although I don’t believe in ghosts. But it makes me feel good to speak with them. Maybe that is what God is. A good God wouldn’t have let my babies die. I can’t believe in that. My babies did nothing wrong.” 

“I agree. They did nothing wrong.” He looked at her thoughtfully. “But a God  that  did  everything  we  thought  was  right  and  good  wouldn’t  be  the creator  of  the  universe.  He  would  be  our  puppet.  He  wouldn’t  be  God. 

There’s more to everything than we can know.” 

Yangjin said nothing but felt strangely calmer. 

“If  Sunja  will  talk  to  you,  perhaps  it  can  help.  I  don’t  know  how,  but maybe it might.” 

“I will ask her to walk with me tomorrow.” 

Yangjin turned back, and Isak walked beside her. 

8

After Isak finished the letter to his brother, he rose from the low table and opened the narrow window in the front room. Isak pulled the crisp air deep into his lungs. His chest didn’t hurt. Throughout his life, everyone around him had talked about his early death as a certainty. He had been sick as an infant  and  throughout  his  youth  with  serious  ailments  in  his  chest,  heart, and  stomach.  Consequently,  little  had  been  expected  of  his  future.  When Isak graduated from seminary, even he had been surprised that he was alive to see such a day. Oddly enough, all the talk of his inevitable death hadn’t discouraged  him.  He  had  become  almost  inured  to  death;  his  frailty  had reinforced his conviction that he must do something of consequence while he had the time. 

His brother Samoel, the eldest son, was never ill, but he had died young. 

He had been beaten badly by the colonial police after a protest and did not survive the arrest. Isak decided then that he would live a braver life. He had spent his youth indoors with his family and tutors, and the healthiest he had ever been was when he attended seminary while working as a lay pastor for his church back home. While alive, Samoel had been a shining light at the seminary  and  their  home  church,  and  Isak  believed  that  his  deceased brother  was  carrying  him  now,  no  different  than  how  he  had  done  so physically when Isak was a boy. 

The  middle  Baek  brother,  Yoseb,  wasn’t  religious  like  Samoel  or  Isak. 

He had never liked school, and at the first opportunity, he had struck out for Japan in search of a different life. He had taught himself to be a machinist and  now  worked  as  a  foreman  of  a  factory  in  Osaka.  He  had  sent  for Kyunghee, the beloved daughter of a family friend, and they were married in Japan. They didn’t have any children. It had been Yoseb’s idea for Isak to

come to Osaka, and he had found him the job at the church. Isak felt certain that Yoseb would understand his decision to ask Sunja to marry him. Yoseb was  an  open-minded  person  with  a  generous  nature.  Isak  addressed  the envelope and put on his coat. 

He picked up his tea tray and brought it to the threshold of the kitchen. 

He  had  been  reminded  numerous  times  that  there  was  no  need  for  him  to bring  his  tray  to  the  kitchen,  where  men  were  not  supposed  to  enter,  but Isak  wanted  to  do  something  for  the  women,  who  were  always  working. 

Near  the  stove,  Sunja  was  peeling  radishes.  She  was  wearing  her  white muslin  hanbok beneath a dark quilted vest. She looked even younger than her age, and he thought she looked lovely as she focused on her task. He couldn’t  tell  if  she  was  pregnant  in  her  full-bodied   chima.  It  was  hard  to imagine a woman’s body changing. He had never been with a woman.

Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

Sunja rushed to get his tray. 

“Here, please let me take that.” 

He  handed  the  tray  to  her  and  opened  his  mouth  to  say  something  but wasn’t sure how. 

She looked at him. “Do you need something, sir?” 

“I was hoping to go into town today. To see someone.” 

Sunja nodded like she understood. 

“Mr. Jun, the coal man, is down the street and will be headed to town. 

Do you want me to ask him to take you?” 

Isak smiled. He had been planning on asking her to accompany him, but he lost his courage suddenly. “Yes. If Mr. Jun’s schedule permits it. Thank you.” 

Sunja rushed outside to get him. 

The church building had been repurposed from an abandoned wood-frame schoolhouse. It was located behind the post office. The coal man pointed it out to him and promised to take him back to the boardinghouse later. 

“I have to run some errands. And I’ll mail your letter.” 

“Do you know Pastor Shin? Would you like to meet him?” 

Jun laughed. “I’ve been to a church once. That was plenty.” 

Jun  didn’t  like  going  to  places  that  asked  for  money.  He  didn’t  like

monks  who  collected  alms,  either.  As  far  as  he  was  concerned,  the  whole religion thing was a racket for overeducated men who didn’t want to do real work.  The  young  pastor  from  Pyongyang  didn’t  seem  lazy,  and  he  had never asked Jun for anything, so he was fine enough. That said, Jun liked the idea of having someone pray for him. 

“Thank you for bringing me here.” 

“It’s nothing. Don’t be mad because I don’t want to be a Christian. You see, Pastor Baek, I’m not a good man, but I’m not a bad one, either.” 

“Mr.  Jun,  you’re  a  very  good  man.  It  was  you  who  led  me  to  the boardinghouse on the night when I was lost. I was so dizzy that evening, I could barely say my own name. You’ve done nothing but help me.” 

The coal man grinned. He wasn’t used to being complimented. 

“Well,  if  you  say  so.”  He  laughed  again.  “When  you’re  done,  I’ll  be waiting for you across the street at the dumpling stand by the post office. 

I’ll meet you over there after I finish with my errands.” 

The servant of the church was wearing a patched men’s overcoat that was far too large for her tiny body. She was a deaf-mute, and she swayed gently while sweeping the chapel floor. At the vibration of Isak’s step, she stopped what she was doing with a jolt and turned. Her worn-down broom grazed her  stocking  feet,  and  she  clutched  on  to  its  handle  in  surprise.  She  said something, but Isak couldn’t make out what she was saying. 

“Hello, I’m here to see Pastor Shin.” He smiled at her. 

The servant scampered to the rear of the church, and Pastor Shin came out of his office at once. He was in his early fifties. Thick glasses covered his deep-set brown eyes. His hair was still black and he kept it short. His white  shirt  and  gray  trousers  were  well  pressed.  Everything  about  him seemed controlled and restrained. 

“Welcome.”  Pastor  Shin  smiled  at  the  nice-looking  young  man  in  the Western-style suit. “What may I do for you?” 

“My  name  is  Baek  Isak.  My  teachers  at  the  seminary  have  written  to you, I think.” 

“Pastor Baek! You’re finally here! I thought you’d be here months ago. 

I’m so pleased to see you. Come, my study is in the back. It’s a bit warmer

there.” He asked the servant to bring them tea. 

“How long have you been in Busan? We’ve been wondering when you’d stop by. You’re headed to our sister church in Osaka?” 

There  was  hardly  any  chance  to  reply  to  all  his  questions.  The  elder pastor spoke rapidly without pausing to hear Isak’s reply. Pastor Shin had attended the seminary in Pyongyang near the time of its founding, and he was  delighted  to  see  a  recent  graduate.  Friends  who  had  been  at  the seminary with him had been Isak’s professors. 

“Do you have a place to stay? We could fix a room for you here. Where are your things?” Shin felt gleeful. It had been a long time since they’d had a new pastor stop by. Many of the Western missionaries had left the country due  to  the  colonial  government’s  crackdown,  and  fewer  young  men  were joining the ministry. Lately, Shin had been feeling lonesome. “I hope you will stay awhile.” 

Isak smiled. 

“I apologize for not calling on you sooner. I’d intended to come by, but I was  very  ill,  and  I’ve  been  recuperating  at  a  boardinghouse  in  Yeongdo. 

The widow of Kim Hoonie and her daughter have been taking care of me. 

The  boardinghouse  is  closer  to  the  beach  than  the  ferry.  Do  you  know them?” 

Pastor Shin cocked his head. 

“No, I don’t know many people on Yeongdo Island. I shall come see you there  soon.  You  look  well.  A  bit  thin,  but  everyone  is  not  eating  enough lately, it seems. Have you eaten? We have food to share.” 

“I’ve eaten already, sir. Thank you.” 

When  the  tea  was  brought  in,  the  men  held  hands  and  prayed,  giving thanks for Isak’s safe arrival. 

“You’re preparing to go to Osaka soon?” 

“Yes.” 

“Good, good.” 

The elder pastor spoke at length about the troubles the churches had been facing.  More  people  were  afraid  to  attend  services  here  and  in  Japan because  the  government  didn’t  approve.  The  Canadian  missionaries  had already left. 

Although Isak knew of these sad developments, he felt ready to face the trials. His professors had discussed the government’s opposition with him. 

Isak grew quiet. 

“Are you all right?” Shin asked. 

“Sir, I was wondering if we could talk. Talk about the Book of Hosea.” 

“Oh? Of course.” Pastor Shin looked puzzled. 

“God  makes  the  prophet  Hosea  marry  a  harlot  and  raise  children  he didn’t father. I suppose the Lord does this to teach the prophet what it feels like to be wedded to a people who continually betray him. Isn’t that right?” 

Isak asked. 

“Well, yes, among other things. And the prophet Hosea obeys the Lord’s request,”  Pastor  Shin  said  in  his  sonorous  voice.  This  was  a  story  he  had preached on before. 

“The  Lord  continues  to  be  committed  to  us  even  when  we  sin.  He continues to love us. In some ways, the nature of his love for us resembles an  enduring  marriage,  or  how  a  father  or  mother  may  love  a  misbegotten child. Hosea was being called to be like God when he had to love a person who would have been difficult to love. We are difficult to love when we sin; a sin is always a transgression against the Lord.” Shin looked carefully at Isak’s face to see if he had reached him. 

Isak  nodded  gravely.  “Do  you  think  it’s  important  for  us  to  feel  what God feels?” 

“Yes,  of  course.  If  you  love  anyone,  you  cannot  help  but  share  his suffering.  If  we  love  our  Lord,  not  just  admire  him  or  fear  him  or  want things  from  him,  we  must  recognize  his  feelings;  he  must  be  in  anguish over our sins. We must understand this anguish. The Lord suffers with us. 

He suffers like us. It is a consolation to know this. To know that we are not in fact alone in our suffering.” 

“Sir, the boardinghouse widow and her daughter saved my life. I reached their doorstep with tuberculosis, and they cared for me for three months.” 

Pastor Shin nodded with recognition. 

“That is a wonderful thing they did. A noble and kind work.” 

“Sir, the daughter is pregnant, and she has been abandoned by the father of the child. She is unmarried and the child will not have a name.” 

Shin looked concerned. 

“I think I should ask her to marry me, and if she says yes, I will take her to Japan as my wife. If she says yes, I would ask you to marry us before we go. I would be honored if—” 

Pastor  Shin  covered  his  own  mouth  with  his  right  hand.  Christians  did such  things—sacrificed  possessions  and  their  own  lives  even—but  such choices had to be made for good reason and soberly. St. Paul and St. John had said, “Test everything.” 

“Have you written to your parents about this?” 

“No.  But  I  think  they  would  understand.  I’ve  refused  to  marry  before, and they had not expected me to do so. Perhaps they will be pleased.” 

“Why have you refused to marry before?” 

“I’ve been an invalid since I was born. I have been improving the past few years, but I got sick again on the journey here. No one in my family expected me to live past twenty-five. I am twenty-six now.” Isak smiled. “If I’d married and had children, I would have made a woman a young widow and perhaps left orphans behind me.” 

“Yes, I see.” 

“I should have been dead by now, but I am alive, sir.” 

“I’m  very  glad  of  it.  Praise  God.”  Shin  smiled  at  the  young  man,  not knowing how to protect him from his wish to make such a grand sacrifice. 

More  than  anything,  he  was  incredulous.  If  it  hadn’t  been  for  the  warm letters  from  his  friends  in  Pyongyang  attesting  to  Isak’s  intelligence  and competence, Shin would have thought that Isak was a religious lunatic. 

“What does the young woman think of this idea?” 

“I don’t know. I have yet to speak with her. The widow told me about her daughter  only  yesterday.  And  last  night  before  my  evening  prayers,  it occurred  to  me  that  this  is  what  I  can  do  for  them:  Give  the  woman  and child my name. What is my name to me? It’s only a matter of grace that I was born a male who could enter my descendants in a family registry. If the young  woman  was  abandoned  by  a  scoundrel,  it’s  hardly  her  fault,  and certainly, even if the man is not a bad person, the unborn child is innocent. 

Why should he suffer so? He would be ostracized.” 

Shin was unable to disagree. 

“If the Lord allows me to live, I shall try to be a good husband to Sunja and a good father to this child.” 

“Sunja?” 

“Yes. She’s the boardinghouse keeper’s daughter.” 

“Your faith is good, son, and your intentions are right, but—” 

“Every child should be wanted; the women and men in the Bible prayed

patiently for children. To be barren was to be an outcast, isn’t that right? If I do not marry and have children, I would be a kind of barren man.” Isak had never articulated this thought before, and this surge of wanting a wife and family felt strange and good to him. 

Shin  smiled  weakly  at  the  young  minister.  After  losing  four  of  his children and his wife to cholera five years ago, Shin found that he could not speak much about loss. Everything a person said sounded glib and foolish. 

He had never understood suffering in this way, not really, until he had lost them.  What  he  had  learned  about  God  and  theology  had  become  more graphic and personal after his family had died so gruesomely. His faith had not wavered, but his temperament had altered seemingly forever. It was as if  a  warm  room  had  gotten  cooler,  but  it  was  still  the  same  room.  Shin admired this idealist seated before him, his young eyes shining with faith, but as his elder, he wanted Isak to take care. 

“Yesterday  morning,  I  had  begun  the  study  of  Hosea,  and  then  a  few hours  later,  the  boardinghouse   ajumoni  told  me  about  her  pregnant daughter. By evening, I knew. The Lord was speaking to me. This has never happened to me before. I’ve never felt that kind of clarity.” Isak felt it was safe to admit this here. “Has that ever happened to you?” He checked for doubt in the elder pastor’s eyes. 

“Yes, it has happened to me, but not always so vividly. I hear the voice of God when I read the Bible, so yes, I suppose I understand what you felt, but there are coincidences, too. We have to be open to that. It’s dangerous to think that everything is a sign from God. Perhaps God is always talking to us,  but  we  don’t  know  how  to  listen,”  Shin  stated.  It  felt  awkward  to confess this uncertainty, but he thought it was important. 

“When I was growing up, I can remember at least three unmarried girls who  were  abandoned  after  becoming  pregnant.  One  was  a  maid  in  our house. Two of the girls killed themselves. The maid in our house returned to her  family  in  Wonsan  and  told  everyone  that  her  husband  had  died.  My mother, a woman who never lies, had told her to say this,” Isak said. 

“This  sort  of  thing  happens  with  greater  frequency  these  days,”  Shin said. “Especially in difficult times.” 

“The boardinghouse  ajumoni saved my life. Maybe my life can matter to this family. I had always wanted to do something important before I died. 

Like my brother Samoel.” 

Shin nodded. He had heard from his seminary friends that Samoel Baek had been a leader in the independence movement. 

“Maybe my life can be significant—not on a grand scale like my brother, but to a few people. Maybe I can help this young woman and her child. And they will be helping me, because I will have a family of my own—a great blessing no matter how you look at it.” 

The young pastor was beyond dissuading. Shin took a breath. 

“Before you do anything, I would like to meet her. And her mother.” 

“I’ll ask them to come. That is if Sunja agrees to marry me. She doesn’t know me really.” 

“That  hardly  matters.”  Shin  shrugged.  “I  didn’t  see  my  wife  until  the wedding day. I understand your impulse to help, but marriage is a serious covenant  made  before  God.  You  know  that.  Please  bring  them  when  you can.” 

The elder pastor put his hands on Isak’s shoulders and prayed over him before he left. 

When  Isak  returned  to  the  boardinghouse,  the  Chung  brothers  were sprawled  out  on  the  heated  floor.  They  had  eaten  their  supper,  and  the women were clearing away the last of the dishes. 

“Ah,  has  the  pastor  been  walking  around  town?  You  must  be  well enough now to have a drink with us?” Gombo, the eldest brother, winked. 

Getting Isak to have a drink with them was a joke the brothers had kept up for months. 

“How was the catch?” Isak asked. 

“No  mermaids,”  Fatso,  the  youngest  brother,  answered  with disappointment. 

“That’s a shame,” Isak said. 

“Pastor, would you like your dinner now?” Yangjin asked. 

“Yes,  thank  you.”  Being  outdoors  had  made  him  hungry,  and  it  felt wonderful to want food in his stomach again. 

The  Chung  brothers  had  no  intention  of  sitting  up  properly,  but  they made room for him. Gombo patted Isak on the back like an old friend. 

Around  the  lodgers,  especially  the  good-natured  Chung  brothers,  Isak

felt  more  like  a  man,  not  a  sickly  student  who’d  spent  most  of  his  life indoors with books. 

Sunja  carried  in  a  low  dinner  table  for  him,  its  small  surface  covered with  side  dishes,  a  piping  hotpot  brimming  with  stew,  and  a  generously rounded portion of steamed millet and barley rice. 

Isak bowed his head in prayer, and everyone else remained silent, feeling awkward, until he raised his head again. 

“So, the good-looking pastor gets far more rice than I do,” complained Fatso.  “Why  should  I  be  surprised?”  He  tried  to  make  an  angry  face  at Sunja, but she didn’t pay him any mind. 

“Have you eaten?” Isak lifted his bowl to Fatso. “There’s plenty here—” 

The  middle  Chung  brother,  the  sensible  one,  pulled  back  the  pastor’s outstretched arm. 

“Fatso  ate  three  bowls  of  millet  and  two  bowls  of  soup.  This  one  has never missed a meal. If we don’t make sure that he’s well fed, he’d chew off my arm! He’s a pig.” 

Fatso poked his brother in the ribs. 

“A  strong  man  has  a  strong  appetite.  You’re  just  jealous  because mermaids prefer me to you. One day, I’m going to marry a beautiful market girl  and  have  her  work  for  me  the  rest  of  my  days.  You  can  repair  the fishing nets by yourself.” 

Gombo and the middle brother laughed, but Fatso ignored them. 

“Maybe  I  should  have  another  bowl  of  rice.  Is  there  any  left  in  the kitchen?” he asked Sunja. 

“Don’t you want to leave some for the women?” Gombo interjected. 

“Is there enough food for the women?” Isak put down his spoon. 

“Yes,  yes,  there’s  plenty  of  food  for  us.  Please  don’t  worry.  If  Fatso wants more food, we can bring him some,” Yangjin assured him. 

Fatso looked sheepish. 

“I’m not hungry. We should smoke a pipe.” He rooted in his pockets for his tobacco. 

“So, Pastor Isak, will you be leaving us soon for Osaka? Or will you join us on the boat and look for mermaids? You look strong enough to pull in the nets  now,”  Fatso  said.  He  lit  the  pipe  and  handed  it  to  his  eldest  brother before smoking it himself. “Why would you leave this beautiful island for a cold city?” 

Isak laughed. “I’m waiting for a reply from my brother. And as soon as I feel well enough to travel, I’ll go to my church in Osaka.” 

“Think  of  the  mermaids  of  Yeongdo.”  Fatso  waved  at  Sunja,  who  was heading to the kitchen. “They will not be the same in Japan.” 

“Your offer is tempting. Perhaps I should find a mermaid to go with me to Osaka.” 

Isak raised his eyebrows. 

“Is the pastor making a joke?” Fatso slapped the floor with delight. 

Isak took a sip of his tea. 

“It might be better if I had a wife for my new life in Osaka.” 

“Put down your tea. Let’s pour this groom a real drink!” Gombo shouted. 

The brothers laughed out loud and the pastor laughed, too. 

In the small house, the women overheard everything the men said. At the thought of the pastor marrying, Dokhee’s neck flushed scarlet with desire, and  her  sister  shot  her  a  look  like  she  was  crazy.  In  the  kitchen,  Sunja unloaded the dinner trays; she crouched down before the large brass basin and began to wash the dishes. 

9

After she finished cleaning up in the kitchen, Sunja said good night to her mother and retreated to the makeshift bedroom they shared with the servant girls. Normally, Sunja went to bed at the same time as the others, but in the past  month,  she’d  been  more  tired  than  she’d  ever  been;  it  was  no  longer possible  to  wait  for  them  to  finish  their  work.  Waking  up  was  no  less difficult;  in  the  morning,  strong  hands  seemed  to  clamp  down  on  her shoulders to keep her from rising. Sunja undressed quickly in the cold room and  slipped  under  the  thick  quilt.  The  floor  was  warm;  Sunja  rested  her heavy head on the lozenge-shaped pillow. Her first thought was of him. 

Hansu was no longer in Busan. The morning after she’d left him at the beach,  she’d  asked  her  mother  to  go  to  the  market  in  her  place,  claiming that she was nauseous and couldn’t be far from the outhouse. For a week, she  didn’t  go  to  the  market.  When  Sunja  finally  returned  to  her  usual routine  of  food  shopping  for  the  house,  Hansu  was  no  longer  there.  Each morning that she went to the market, she had looked for him, but he was not there. 

The heat from the  ondol floor warmed the pallet beneath her; all day she had  been  feeling  chilled.  Her  eyes  finally  closed,  Sunja  rested  her  hands over the slight swell of her stomach. She could not yet feel the child, but her body  was  changing.  Her  keener  sense  of  smell  was  the  most  noticeable change and hard to bear: Walking through the fish stalls made her feel sick; the worst was the smell of crabs and shrimp. Her limbs felt puffier, almost spongy.  She  knew  nothing  about  having  a  baby.  What  she  was  growing inside her was a secret—mysterious even to herself. What would the child be like? she wondered. Sunja wanted to talk about these things with him. 

Since  Sunja’s  confession  to  her  mother,  neither  of  them  talked  again

about  the  pregnancy.  Anguish  had  deepened  the  lines  along  her  mother’s mouth like a frown setting in for good. During the day, Sunja went about her work faithfully, but at night, before she went to bed, she wondered if he thought about her and their child. 

If she had agreed to remain his mistress and waited for him to visit her, she  would  have  been  able  to  keep  him.  He  could’ve  gone  to  see  his  wife and daughters in Japan whenever he wanted. Yet this arrangement had felt impossible to her, and even in her present weakness, it felt untenable. She missed him, but she couldn’t imagine sharing him with another woman he also loved. 

Sunja had been foolish. Why had she supposed that a man of his age and position wouldn’t have a wife and children? That he could want to marry some ignorant peasant girl was absurd indeed. Wealthy men had wives and mistresses,  sometimes  even  in  the  same  household.  She  couldn’t  be  his mistress,  however.  Her  crippled  father  had  loved  her  mother,  who  had grown up even poorer than most; he had treasured her. When he was alive, after the boardinghouse guests were served their meals, the three would eat together as a family at the same low dinner table. Her father could’ve eaten before the women, but he’d never wanted that. At the table, he’d make sure that  her  mother  had  as  much  meat  and  fish  on  her  plate  as  he  did.  In  the summer,  after  finishing  a  long  day,  he’d  tend  to  the  watermelon  patch because  it  was  his  wife’s  favorite  fruit.  Each  winter,  he’d  procure  fresh cotton wool to pad their jackets, and if there wasn’t enough, he’d claim his own jacket didn’t need new filling. 

“You  have  the  kindest  father  in  the  land,”  her  mother  would  often remark,  and  Sunja  had  been  proud  of  his  love  for  them,  the  way  a  child from a rich family might have been proud of her father’s numerous bags of rice and piles of gold rings. 

Nevertheless, she couldn’t stop thinking of Hansu. Whenever she’d met him  at  the  cove,  the  cloudless  sky  and  jade-colored  water  would  recede from her sight, leaving only the images of him, and she used to wonder how their time together could vanish so quickly. What amusing story would he tell her? What could she do to make him stay even a few minutes longer? 

So when he would tuck her in between two sheltering boulders and untie the long sash of her blouse, she let him do what he wanted even though the cold air cut her. She’d dissolve herself into his warm mouth and skin. When

he  slid  his  hands  below  her  long  skirt  and  lifted  her  bottom  to  him,  she understood that this was what a man wanted from his woman. Lovemaking would  make  her  feel  alert;  her  body  seemed  to  want  this  touch;  and  her lower parts accommodated the pressure of him. Sunja had believed that he would do what was good for her. 

Sometimes, she imagined that if she carried the load of wash on her head and walked to the beach, he’d be waiting for her on that steep rock by the clear water, his open newspaper flapping noisily in the breeze. He’d lift the bundle from her head, tug at her braid gently, and say, “My girl, where were you?  Do  you  know  I  would  have  waited  for  you  until  the  morning.”  Last week,  she’d  felt  the  call  of  him  so  strongly  that  she  made  an  excuse  one afternoon and ran to the cove, and of course, it had been in vain. The chalk-marked rock they used to leave behind like a message was no longer in its crevice, and she was bereft because she would have liked to have drawn an X and left it in the hollow of the rocks to show him that she had come back and waited for him. 

He  had  cared  for  her;  those  feelings  were  true.  He  had  not  been  lying, she thought, but it was little consolation. Sunja opened her eyes suddenly when  she  heard  the  servant  girls  laughing  in  the  kitchen,  then  quieting down. There was no sound of her mother. Sunja shifted her body away from the  door  to  face  the  interior  wall  and  placed  her  hand  on  her  cheek  to imitate his caress. Whenever he saw her, he would touch her constantly, like he  could  not  help  from  doing  so;  after  making  love,  his  finger  traced  the curve of her face from her small, round chin to the bend of her ears to the expanse of her pale brow. Why had she never touched him that way? She’d never  touched  him  first;  it  was  he  who’d  reached  for  her.  She  wanted  to touch his face now—to memorize the continuous line of his bones. 

In  the  morning,  Isak  put  on  his  navy  woolen  sweater  over  his  warmest undershirt and dress shirt and sat on the floor of the front room using a low dining  table  as  his  desk.  The  lodgers  had  left  already,  and  the  house  was quiet except for the sounds of the women working. Isak’s Bible lay open on the  table;  Isak  had  not  begun  his  morning  studies,  because  he  couldn’t concentrate.  In  the  small  foyer  by  the  front  room,  Yangjin  tended  to  the

brazier filled with hot coals. He wanted to speak to her, yet feeling shy, Isak waited. Yangjin stirred the coals using a crude poker, observing the glowing embers. 

“Are you warm enough? I’ll put this by you.” Yangjin got on her knees and pushed the brazier to where he was seated. 

“Let me help you,” Isak said, getting up. 

“No, stay where you are. You just slide it.” This was how her husband, Hoonie, used to move the brazier. 

As she moved closer, he looked around to see if the others could hear. 

“Ajumoni,”  Isak  whispered,  “do  you  think  she  would  have  me  as  a husband? If I asked her?” 

Yangjin’s  crinkled  eyes  widened,  and  she  dropped  the  poker,  making  a clanging sound. She picked up the metal stick quickly and laid it down with care as if to correct her earlier movement. She slumped beside him, closer than she’d ever sat next to another man except for her husband and father. 

“Are you all right?” he asked. 

“Why? Why would you do this?” 

“If I had a wife, my life would be better in Osaka, I think. I’ve written my brother already. I know he and his wife would welcome her.” 

“And your parents?” 

“They’ve wanted me to marry for years. I’ve always said no.” 

“Why?” 

“Because  I’ve  always  been  ill.  I  feel  well  now,  but  it’s  not  possible  to know  how  and  when  I  might  die.  Sunja  knows  this  already.  None  of  this would be a surprise.” 

“But, you know that she is—” 

“Yes.  And  it  is  also  likely  that  I’ll  make  her  a  young  widow.  And  you know that’s not easy, but I would be the father. Until I die.” 

Yangjin said nothing; she was a young widow herself. Her husband was an honest man who had made the best of a difficult birth. When he died, she knew that he had been a very special man. She wished he were here to tell her what to do. 

“I didn’t mean to trouble you,” Isak said, seeing the shock in her face. “I thought  it  might  be  something  she  could  want.  For  the  child’s  future.  Do you  think  she’d  agree?  Perhaps  she  intends  to  stay  here  with  you.  Would that be better for her and the child?” 

“No,  no.  Of  course  it  would  be  far  better  for  them  if  she  went  away,” 

Yangjin  replied,  knowing  the  hard  truth.  “The  child  would  have  a  terrible life here. You’d be saving my daughter’s life as well. If you would take care of  my  daughter,  I’d  gladly  pay  you  with  my  life,  sir.  I’d  pay  twice  if  I could.”  She  bowed  low,  her  head  almost  touching  the  yellow  floor,  and wiped her eyes. 

“No, you mustn’t say that. You and your daughter have been angels.” 

“I’ll speak to her right away, sir. She’ll be grateful.” 

Isak got quiet. He wanted to know how to say this next thing properly. 

“I don’t want that,” he said, feeling embarrassed. “I’d like to ask her, to ask her about her heart. I’d like to know if she could love me one day.” Isak felt embarrassed, because it had occurred to him that, like an ordinary man, he wanted a wife who’d love him, not just feel indebted to him. 

“What do you think?” 

“You should speak to her.” How could Sunja not care for a man like this? 

Isak  whispered,  “She’s  not  getting  a  good  bargain.  I  may  fall  ill  again soon. But I’d try to be a decent husband. And I would love the child. He would be mine, too.” Isak felt happy thinking of living long enough to raise a child. 

“Please  walk  with  her  tomorrow.  You  can  speak  to  her  about  all  these things.” 

Her mother told her Baek Isak’s intentions, and Sunja prepared herself to be his wife. If Baek Isak married her, a painful sentence would be lifted from her  mother,  the  boardinghouse,  herself,  and  the  child.  An  honorable  man from  a  good  family  would  give  the  child  his  name.  Sunja  couldn’t comprehend  his  reasons.  Her  mother  had  tried  to  explain,  but  neither thought what they’d done for him was so unusual. They would have done it for  any  lodger,  and  he  had  even  paid  his  fees  on  time.  “No  normal  man would want to raise another man’s child unless he was an angel or a fool,” 

her mother said. 

He  didn’t  seem  like  a  fool.  Perhaps  he  needed  a  housekeeper,  yet  that didn’t  seem  like  him.  As  soon  as  the  pastor  had  been  feeling  better,  and even when he wasn’t entirely well, he’d carried his finished meal trays to

the threshold of the kitchen. In the mornings, he shook out his own bedding and  put  away  the  pallet.  He  did  more  to  care  for  himself  than  any  of  the lodgers. She’d never imagined an educated man from an upper-class family who’d grown up in a household with servants would ever do these things. 

Sunja put on her thick coat. She wore straw sandals over two pairs of white cotton socks and waited by the door outside. The air was frigid and misty. 

In a month or so, it would be spring, but it felt like deep winter still. Her mother had asked the pastor to meet her outside, not wanting the servants to see the two together. 

Isak came out momentarily, holding his felt hat. 

“Are  you  well?”  Isak  stood  parallel  to  her,  not  knowing  where  they should  go.  He’d  never  been  out  with  a  young  woman  before—not  in  this way, and never with the intention of asking her to marry him. He tried to pretend  that  he  was  counseling  a  female  parishioner—something  he  had done many times back home. 

“Would  you  like  to  go  into  town?  We  could  take  the  ferry.”  The suggestion came to him spontaneously. 

Sunja nodded and draped her head with a thick muslin scarf to cover her exposed ears. She resembled the women selling fish in the market. 

They  walked  quietly  toward  the  Yeongdo  ferry,  not  knowing  what  the others  who  saw  them  together  might  think.  The  boatman  accepted  their fares. 

The wooden boat was mostly empty, so they sat together for the duration of the short trip. 

“Your mother spoke to you,” Isak said, trying to keep his voice level. 

“Yes.” 

He  tried  to  read  her  feelings  in  her  young,  pretty  face.  She  looked terrified. 

“Thank you,” she said. 

“What do you think of it?” 

“I’m  very  grateful.  It’s  a  heavy  burden  that  you’ve  taken  off  our shoulders. We don’t know how to thank you.” 

“My life is nothing. It wouldn’t have any meaning without putting it to

good use. Don’t you think?” 

Sunja played with the side edge of her  chima. 

“I have a question,” Isak said. 

Sunja kept her eyes lowered. 

“Do you think you can love God?” He inhaled. “If you could love God, then I know everything will be all right. It’s a lot, I think, to ask of you. It might not make sense now. It will take time. I do understand that.” 

This morning, it had occurred to Sunja that he’d ask her something like this, and she’d given thought to this God that the pastor believed in. Spirits existed  in  the  world—she  believed  this  even  though  her  father  had  not. 

After he died, she felt that he was with her. When they went to his grave for the  jesa,  it  was  easy  to  feel  his  comforting  presence.  If  there  were  many gods and dead spirits, then she felt that she could love his god, especially if his god could encourage Baek Isak to be such a kind and thoughtful person. 

“Yes,” she said. “I can.” 

The boat docked, and Isak helped her off. The mainland was very cold, and Sunja tucked her hands into her jacket sleeves to warm them. The sharp winds cut through their bodies. She worried that the bitter weather would be bad for the pastor. 

Neither  knew  where  they  should  go  next,  so  she  pointed  to  the  main shopping street not far from the ferry. It was the only place she’d ever gone with her parents on the mainland. She walked in that direction, not wanting to  take  the  lead,  but  he  did  not  seem  to  care  about  that.  He  followed  her steps. 

“I’m glad you’ll try—try to love God. It means a great deal. I think we can have a good marriage if we share this faith.” 

She  nodded  again,  not  entirely  understanding  what  he  meant,  but  she trusted that he had a sound reason for his request. 

“Our lives will be strange at first, but we’ll ask God for his blessing—on us and the child.” 

Sunja  imagined  that  his  prayer  would  act  like  a  thick  cloak  to  shield them. 

Gulls  hovered,  shrieking  loudly,  then  flew  away.  She  realized  that  the marriage had a condition, but it was easy to accept it; there was no way for him  to  test  her  devotion.  How  do  you  prove  that  you  love  God?  How  do you  prove  that  you  love  your  husband?  She  would  never  betray  him;  she

would work hard to care for him—this she could do. 

Isak paused in front of a tidy Japanese restaurant that served noodles. 

“Have you ever had udon?” He raised his eyebrows. 

She shook her head no. 

He led her inside. The customers there were Japanese, and she was the only female. The owner, a Japanese man in a spotless apron, greeted them in Japanese. The couple bowed. 

Isak asked for a table for two in Japanese, and the owner relaxed upon hearing his language spoken so well. They chatted amiably, and the owner offered them seats at the edge of the communal table near the door with no one  beside  them.  Isak  and  Sunja  sat  opposite  each  other,  making  it impossible to avoid each other’s faces. 

Sunja  couldn’t  read  the  hand-painted  menus  on  the  plywood  walls  but recognized some of the Japanese numbers. Office workers and shopkeepers sat  on  three  long  tables  covered  in  wax  cloths  and  slurped  from  their steaming bowls of soupy noodles. A Japanese boy with a shaved head went around pouring brown tea from a heavy brass kettle. He tipped his head to her slightly. 

“I’ve never been to a restaurant before,” she found herself saying, more out of surprise than from a wish to talk. 

“I  haven’t  been  to  many  myself.  This  place  looks  clean,  though.  My father said that’s important when you eat outside your home.” Isak smiled, wanting  Sunja  to  feel  more  comfortable.  The  warmth  of  being  inside  had brought color to her face. “Are you hungry?” 

Sunja nodded. She hadn’t eaten anything that morning. 

Isak ordered two bowls of udon for them. 

“It’s like  kalguksu, but the broth is different. I thought maybe you might like it. I’m sure it’s sold everywhere in Osaka. Everything there will be new for us.” More and more, Isak liked the idea of having her go with him. 

Sunja had heard many stories about Japan from Hansu already, but she couldn’t  tell  Isak  this.  Hansu  had  said  that  Osaka  was  an  enormous  place where you’d hardly ever see the same person twice. 

As he talked, Isak observed her. Sunja was a private person. Even at the house, she did not talk much to the girls who worked there or even to her mother. Was she always this way? he wondered. It was hard to imagine that she’d had a lover. 

Isak spoke to her quietly, not wishing to be heard by the others. 

“Sunja,  do  you  think  you  could  care  for  me?  As  your  husband?”  Isak clasped his hands as if in prayer. 

“Yes.” The answer came quickly because this felt true to her. She cared for him now, and she didn’t want him to think otherwise. 

Isak felt light and clean inside, as if his diseased lungs had been scoured back to health. He took a breath. 

“I expect it will be difficult, but would you try to forget him?” There, he said it. They would not have secret thoughts. 

Sunja winced, not having expected him to speak of this. 

“I’m  not  different  from  other  men.  I  have  my  pride,  which  I  know  is probably wrong.” He frowned. “But I’ll love this child, and I will love you and honor you.” 

“I’ll do my best to be a good wife.” 

“Thank you,” he said. He hoped he and Sunja would be close, the way his parents were. 

When the noodles arrived, he bowed to say grace, and Sunja laced her fingers together, copying his movements. 

10

A week later, Yangjin, Sunja, and Isak took the morning ferry to Busan. 

The  women  wore  freshly  laundered   hanbok  made  of  white  hemp  beneath padded winter jackets; Isak’s suit and coat had been brushed clean and his shoes polished bright. Pastor Shin was expecting them after breakfast. 

Upon  their  arrival,  the  church  servant  recognized  Isak  and  led  them  to Pastor Shin’s office. 

“You’re here,” the elder pastor said, rising from his seat on the floor. He spoke  with  a  northern  accent.  “Come  in,  come  in.”  Yangjin  and  Sunja bowed deeply. They’d never been inside a church before. Pastor Shin was a thin man whose clothes were too big for him. The sleeve hems on his aging black suit were frayed, but the white collar at his throat was clean and well starched. His unwrinkled dark clothes appeared to flatten the bent C-curve of his shoulders. 

The servant girl brought three floor cushions for the guests and laid them near the brazier in the center of the poorly heated room. 

The  three  guests  stood  awkwardly  until  Pastor  Shin  took  his  seat.  Isak was  seated  beside  Pastor  Shin,  and  Yangjin  and  Sunja  opposite  the  elder minister. 

Once they were seated, no one spoke, waiting for Pastor Shin to lead the meeting with a prayer. After he finished, the elder pastor took his time to assess the young woman whom Isak planned to marry. He’d been thinking a great deal about her since the young pastor’s last visit. In preparation for the interview, Shin had even reread the Book of Hosea. The elegant young man in  his  charcoal  woolen  suit  contrasted  dramatically  with  the  stocky  girl—

Sunja’s  face  was  round  and  plain,  and  her  eyes  were  lowered  either  in modesty  or  shame.  Nothing  in  her  prosaic  appearance  conjured  up  the

harlot  the  prophet  Hosea  had  been  forced  to  marry.  She  was,  in  fact, unremarkable in her manner. Pastor Shin didn’t believe in reading faces to determine a person’s fate as his own father had, but if he were to filter her destiny through his father’s eyes, it didn’t look as if her life would be easy, but neither was it cursed. He glanced at her stomach, but he couldn’t tell her condition under the full  chima and her coat. 

“How  do  you  feel  about  going  to  Japan  with  Isak?”  the  elder  pastor asked Sunja. 

Sunja  looked  up,  then  looked  down.  She  wasn’t  sure  what  it  was  that ministers did exactly or how they exercised their powers. Pastor Shin and Pastor Isak weren’t likely to fall into spells like male shamans or chant like monks. 

“I’d like to hear what you think,” Shin said, his body leaning in toward her. “Please say something. I wouldn’t want you to leave my office without my having heard your voice.” 

Isak  smiled  at  the  women,  not  knowing  what  to  make  of  the  elder pastor’s stern tone of voice. He wanted to assure them that the pastor was well-meaning. 

Yangjin placed her hand gently on her daughter’s knee. She’d expected some sort of questioning but she hadn’t realized until now that Pastor Shin thought badly of them. 

“Sunja-ya,  tell  Pastor  Shin  what  you  think  about  marrying  Baek  Isak,” 

Yangjin said. 

Sunja opened her mouth, then closed it. She opened it again, her voice tremulous. 

“I’m very grateful. To Pastor Baek for his painful sacrifice. I will work very hard to serve him. I will do whatever I can to make his life in Japan better.” 

Isak frowned; he could see why she’d say this, but all the same, Sunja’s sentiment saddened him. 

“Yes.”  The  elder  pastor  clasped  his  hands  together.  “This  is  indeed  a painful sacrifice. Isak is a fine young man from a good family, and it cannot be easy for him to undertake this marriage, given your situation.” 

Isak lifted his right hand slightly in a weak protest, but he kept quiet in deference to his elder. If Pastor Shin refused to marry them, his parents and teachers would be troubled. 

Pastor Shin said to Sunja, “You’ve brought this condition upon yourself; is this not true?” 

Isak couldn’t bear to look at her hurt expression and wanted to take the women back to the boardinghouse. 

“I  made  a  serious  mistake.  I’m  very  sorry  for  what  I  have  done  to  my mother and for the burden I made for the good pastor.” Tears filled Sunja’s dark eyes. She looked even younger than she normally did. 

Yangjin took her daughter’s hand and held it, not knowing if it was right or wrong; she broke into sobs herself. 

“Pastor Shin, she is suffering so much already,” Isak blurted out. 

“She  must  recognize  her  sin  and  wish  to  be  forgiven.  If  she  asks,  our Lord will forgive her.” Shin said each word thoughtfully. 

“I suppose she would want that.” Isak had not wanted Sunja to turn to God in this way. Love for God, he’d thought, should come naturally and not out of fear of punishment. 

Pastor Shin looked hard at Sunja. 

“Do you, Sunja? Do you want to be forgiven for your sin?” Pastor Shin didn’t know if the girl knew what sin was. In the young man’s exuberance to  be  a  kind  of  martyr  or  prophet,  had  Isak  explained  any  of  this  to  her? 

How could he marry a sinful woman who would not turn from sin? And yet this was precisely what God had asked the prophet Hosea to do. Did Isak understand this? 

“To have been with a man without marrying is a sin in the eyes of God. 

Where is this man? Why must Isak pay for your sin?” Shin asked. 

Sunja  tried  to  mop  up  the  tears  on  her  flushed  cheeks  using  her  jacket sleeve. 

In  the  corner,  the  deaf  servant  girl  could  make  out  some  of  what  was being  said  by  reading  their  lips.  She  withdrew  a  clean  cloth  from  her overcoat  pocket  and  gave  it  to  Sunja.  She  gestured  to  Sunja  to  wipe  her face, and Sunja smiled at her. 

Pastor Shin sighed. Although he didn’t want to upset the girl any further, he felt compelled to protect the earnest young minister. 

“Where is the father of your child, Sunja?” Pastor Shin asked. 

“She  does  not  know,  Pastor  Shin,”  Yangjin  replied,  though  she  was curious  to  know  the  answer  herself.  “She’s  very  sorry  for  this.”  Yangjin turned to her daughter: “Tell the pastor—tell him that you want forgiveness

from the Lord.” 

Neither Yangjin nor Sunja knew what that would mean. Would there be a ritual like when you gave the shaman a sow and money to make the crops grow? Baek Isak had never once mentioned this thing about forgiveness. 

“Could you? Could you forgive me?” Sunja asked the older minister. 

Pastor Shin felt pity for the child. 

“Sunja, it’s not up to me to forgive you,” he replied. 

“I  don’t  understand,”  she  said,  finally  looking  directly  at  Pastor  Shin’s face, unable to keep her eyes lowered. Her nose was running. 

“Sunja, all you have to do is ask the Lord to forgive you. Jesus has paid our debts, but you still have to ask for forgiveness. Promise that you’ll turn from sin. Repent, child, and sin no more.” Pastor Shin could sense that she wanted  to  learn.  He  felt  something  inside,  and  he  was  reminded  of  the infant within her who had done nothing wrong. Then Shin recalled Gomer, Hosea’s  harlot  wife,  who  remained  unrepentant  and  later  cheated  on  him again. He frowned. 

“I’m  very  sorry,”  Sunja  repeated.  “I  won’t  do  it  again.  I  will  never  be with another man.” 

“It makes sense that you’d want to marry this young man. Yes, he wants to  marry  you  and  to  take  care  of  the  child,  but  I  don’t  know  if  this  is prudent. I worry that he is perhaps too idealistic. His family isn’t here, and I need to make sure that he will be all right.” 

Sunja nodded in agreement, her sobs subsiding. 

Yangjin gulped, having feared this ever since Baek Isak had mentioned that they’d need to speak with Pastor Shin. 

“Pastor Shin, I believe Sunja will be a good wife,” Isak pleaded. “Please marry us, sir. I’d like your blessing. You speak from deep and wise concern, but I believe this is the Lord’s wish. I believe this marriage will benefit me as much as it will benefit Sunja and the child.” 

Pastor Shin exhaled. 

“Do you know how difficult it is to be a pastor’s wife?” he asked Sunja. 

Sunja shook her head no. Her breathing was more normal now. 

“Have you told her?” he asked Isak. 

“I’ll be the associate pastor. I don’t expect that much will be expected of her.  The  congregation  isn’t  large.  Sunja  is  a  hard  worker  and  learns quickly,”  Isak  said.  He  had  not  thought  much  about  this,  however.  The

pastor’s  wife  at  his  home  church  in  Pyongyang  had  been  a  great  lady,  a tireless woman who’d borne eight children, worked alongside her husband to care for orphans and to serve the poor. When she died, the parishioners had wailed as if they’d lost their own mother. 

Isak, Sunja, and Yangjin sat quietly, not knowing what else to do. 

“You must swear that you’ll be faithful to this man. If you’re not, you’ll bring  far  greater  shame  on  your  mother  and  your  dead  father  than  what you’ve already done. You must ask the Lord for forgiveness, child, and ask Him  for  faith  and  courage  as  you  make  your  new  home  in  Japan.  Be perfect, child. Every Korean must be on his best behavior over there. They think so little of us already. You cannot give them any room to think worse of  us.  One  bad  Korean  ruins  it  for  thousands  of  others.  And  one  bad Christian hurts tens of thousands of Christians everywhere, especially in a nation of unbelievers. Do you understand my meaning?” 

“I want to,” she said. “And I want to be forgiven, sir.” 

Pastor  Shin  got  on  bended  knees  and  placed  his  right  hand  on  her shoulder. He prayed at length for her and Isak. When he finished, he got up and  made  the  couple  rise  and  married  them.  The  ceremony  was  over  in minutes. 

While Pastor Shin went with Isak and Sunja to the municipal offices and the local police station to register their marriage, Yangjin made her way to the shopping street, her steps rapid and deliberate. She felt like running. At the wedding ceremony, there were many words she had not understood. It was preposterous  and  ungrateful  for  her  to  have  wished  for  a  better  outcome under  the  circumstances,  but  Yangjin,  no  matter  how  practical  her  nature, had hoped for something nicer for her only child. Although it made sense to marry at once, she hadn’t known that the wedding would take place today. 

Her  own  perfunctory  wedding  had  taken  minutes,  also.  Perhaps  it  didn’t matter, she told herself. 

When Yangjin reached the sliding door of the rice shop, she knocked on the  wide  frame  of  the  entrance  prior  to  entering.  The  store  was  empty  of customers. A striped cat was slinking about the rice seller’s straw shoes and purring happily. 

“Ajumoni, it’s been a long time,” Cho greeted her. The rice seller smiled at Hoonie’s widow. There was more gray in her bun than he remembered. 

“Ajeossi, hello. I hope your wife and girls are well.” 

He nodded. 

“Could you sell me some white rice?” 

“Waaaaah,  you  must  have  an  important  guest  staying  with  you.  I’m sorry, but I don’t have any to sell. You know where it all goes,” he said. 

“I have money to pay,” she said, putting down the drawstring purse on the  counter  between  them.  It  was  Sunja  who  had  embroidered  the  yellow butterflies on the blue canvas fabric of the purse—a birthday present from two  years  back.  The  blue  purse  was  half  full,  and  Yangjin  hoped  it  was enough. 

Cho  grimaced.  He  didn’t  want  to  sell  her  the  rice,  because  he  had  no choice but to charge her the same price he would charge a Japanese. 

“I  have  so  little  stock,  and  when  the  Japanese  customers  come  in  and there isn’t any, I get into very hot water. You understand. Believe me, it’s not that I don’t want to sell it to you.” 

“Ajeossi, my daughter married today,” Yangjin said, trying not to cry. 

“Sunja?  Who?  Who  did  she  marry?”  He  could  picture  the  little  girl holding  her  crippled  father’s  hand.  “I  didn’t  know  she  was  betrothed! 

Today?” 

“The guest from the North.” 

“The  one  with  tuberculosis?  That’s  crazy!  Why  would  you  let  your daughter marry a man who has such a thing. He’s going to drop dead any minute.” 

“He’ll take her to Osaka. Her life will be less difficult for her than living at a boardinghouse with so many men,” she said, hoping this would be the end of it. 

She  wasn’t  telling  him  the  truth,  and  Cho  knew  it.  The  girl  must  have been sixteen or seventeen. Sunja was a few years younger than his second daughter; it was a good time for a girl to marry, but why would he marry her? Jun, the coal man, had said he was a fancy sort from a rich family. She also had diseases in her blood. Who wanted that? Though there weren’t as many girls in Osaka, he supposed. 

“Did  he  make  a  good  offer?”  Cho  asked,  frowning  at  the  little  purse. 

Kim Yangjin couldn’t have given a man like that any kind of decent dowry; 

the  boardinghouse  woman  would  barely  have  a  few  brass  coins  left  after she fed those hungry fishermen and the two poor sisters she shouldn’t have taken in. 

His own daughters had married years ago. Last year, the younger one’s husband had run away to Manchuria because the police were after him for organizing demonstrations, so now Cho fed this great patriot’s children by selling his finest inventory to rich Japanese customers whom his son-in-law had  been  so  passionate  about  expelling  from  the  nation.  If  his  Japanese customers refused to patronize him, Cho’s shop would shut down tomorrow and his family would starve. 

“Do  you  need  enough  rice  for  a  wedding  party?”  he  asked,  unable  to fathom how the woman would pay for such a thing. 

“No. Just enough for the two of them.” 

Cho  nodded  at  the  small,  tired  woman  standing  in  front  of  him  who wouldn’t meet his eyes. 

“I don’t have much to sell,” he repeated. 

“I want only enough for the bride and groom’s dinner—for them to taste white rice again before they leave home.” Yangjin’s eyes welled up in tears, and  the  rice  seller  looked  away.  Cho  hated  seeing  women  cry.  His grandmother,  mother,  wife,  and  daughters—all  of  them  cried  endlessly. 

Women cried too much, he thought. 

His  older  daughter  lived  on  the  other  side  of  town  with  a  man  who worked  as  a  printer,  and  his  younger  one  and  her  three  children  lived  at home with him and his wife. As much as the rice seller complained about the expense of upkeep of his daughter and grandchildren, he worked hard and  did  the  bidding  of  any  Japanese  customer  who’d  pay  the  top  price because  he  could  not  imagine  not  providing  for  his  family;  he  could  not imagine  having  his  girls  live  far  away—in  a  nation  where  Koreans  were treated  no  better  than  barn  animals.  He  couldn’t  imagine  losing  his  flesh and blood to the sons of bitches. 

Yangjin counted out the yen notes and placed them on the wooden tray on the counter beside the abacus. 

“A small bag if you have it. I want them to eat their fill. Whatever’s left over, I’ll make them some sweet cake.” 

Yangjin  pushed  the  tray  of  money  toward  him.  If  he  still  said  no,  then she would march into every rice shop in Busan so her daughter could have

white rice for her wedding dinner. 

“Cakes?” Cho crossed his arms and laughed out loud; how long had it been since he heard women talking of cakes made of white rice? Such days felt so distant. “I suppose you’ll bring me a piece.” 

She wiped her eyes as the rice seller went to the storeroom to find the bit he’d squirreled away for occasions such as these. 

11

At last, the lodgers had relented and allowed their work clothes to be washed.  The  smell  was  no  longer  bearable  even  to  themselves.  Carrying four enormous bundles, Bokhee, Dokhee, and Sunja went to the cove. Their long skirts gathered up and tied, the women crouched by the stream and set up  their  washboards.  The  icy  water  froze  their  small  hands,  the  skin  on them thickened and rough from years of work. With all her might, Bokhee scrubbed  the  wet  shirts  on  the  ridged  wooden  board  while  her  younger sister, Dokhee, sorted the remainder of the filthy clothing beside her. Sunja was tackling a pair of dark trousers belonging to one of the Chung brothers, stained with fish blood and guts. 

“Do  you  feel  different  being  married?”  Dokhee  asked.  The  girls  had been  the  first  to  be  told  the  news  immediately  after  the  marriage  was registered.  They’d  been  even  more  astonished  than  the  lodgers.  “Has  he called you  yobo?” 

Bokhee  looked  up  from  her  work  for  Sunja’s  reaction.  She  would’ve chided her sister’s impertinence, but she was curious herself. 

“Not yet,” Sunja said. The marriage had taken place three days ago, but for lack of space, Sunja still slept in the same room with her mother and the servant girls. 

“I’d like to be married,” Dokhee said. 

Bokhee laughed. “Who’d marry girls like us?” 

“I  would  like  to  marry  a  man  like  Pastor  Isak,”  Dokhee  said  without blinking. “He’s so handsome and nice. He looks at you with such kindness when he talks to you. Even the lodgers respect him, even though he doesn’t know anything about the sea. Have you noticed that?” 

This  was  true.  Routinely,  the  lodgers  made  fun  of  upper-class  people

who went to schools, but they liked Isak. It was still difficult for Sunja to think of him as her husband. 

Bokhee  slapped  her  sister’s  forearm.  “You’re  crazy.  A  man  like  that would never marry you. Get these stupid ideas out of your head.” 

“But he married Sunja—” 

“She’s different. You and I are servants,” Bokhee said. 

Dokhee rolled her eyes. 

“What does he call you, then?” 

“He calls me Sunja,” she said, feeling freer to talk. Before Hansu, Sunja had chatted more often with the sisters. 

“Are you excited about going to Japan?” Bokhee asked. She was more interested  in  living  in  a  city  than  being  married,  which  seemed  like  a horrible thing. Her grandmother and mother had been more or less worked to death. She had never once heard her mother laugh. 

“The men said that Osaka is a busier place than Busan or Seoul. Where will you live?” Bokhee asked. 

“I don’t know. At Pastor Isak’s brother’s house, I guess.” Sunja was still thinking about Hansu and how he might be nearby. More than anything, she was afraid of running into him. Yet it would be worse, she thought, never to see him at all. 

Bokhee peered into Sunja’s face. 

“Are you afraid of going? You mustn’t be. I think you’re going to have a wonderful life there. The men said there are electric lights everywhere—on trains, cars, streets, and in all the houses. They said Osaka has all the things you  could  possibly  want  to  buy  in  stores.  Maybe  you’ll  become  rich  and you  can  send  for  us.  We  can  keep  a  boardinghouse  there!”  Bokhee  was amazed at such a prospect that she had just invented for them. “They must need  boardinghouses,  too.  Your  mother  can  cook,  and  we  can  clean  and wash—” 

“You  think  I  have  crazy  thoughts  in  my  head?”  Dokhee  slapped  her sister’s shoulder, leaving a wet handprint on her sister’s jacket sleeve. 

Sunja had difficulty wringing out the wet trousers because they were so heavy. 

“Can a minister’s wife be rich?” Sunja asked. 

“Maybe the minister will make lots of money!” Dokhee said. “And his parents are rich, right?” 

“How do you know that?” Sunja asked. Her mother had said that Isak’s parents owned some land, but many of the landowners had been selling off their plots to the Japanese to pay the new taxes. “I don’t know if we’ll have much money. It doesn’t matter.” 

“His clothes are so nice, and he’s educated,” Dokhee said, not clear as to how people had money. 

Sunja started to wash another pair of trousers. 

Dokhee glanced at her sister. “Can we give it to her now?” 

Bokhee  nodded,  wanting  to  take  Sunja’s  mind  off  leaving.  The  girl looked anxious and sad, nothing like a happy bride. 

“You’re  like  a  little  sister  to  us,  but  you’ve  always  felt  older  because you’re smart and patient,” Bokhee said, smiling. 

“When you’re gone, who’ll defend me when I get a scolding from your mother? You know my sister won’t do anything,” Dokhee added. 

Sunja laid aside the pants she was washing by the rocks. The sisters had been with her ever since her father had died; she couldn’t imagine not living with them. 

“We  wanted  to  give  you  something.”  Dokhee  held  out  a  pair  of  ducks carved out of acacia wood hanging from a red silk cord. They were the size of a baby’s hand. 

“The   ajeossi  at  the  market  said  ducks  mate  for  life,”  Bokhee  said. 

“Maybe  you  can  come  back  home  in  a  few  years  and  bring  home  your children  to  show  us.  I’m  good  at  taking  care  of  babies.  I  raised  Dokhee almost by myself. Although she can be naughty.” 

Dokhee  pushed  up  her  nostrils  with  her  index  finger  to  make  a  piggy face. 

“Lately, you’ve been looking so unhappy. We know why,” Dokhee said. 

Sunja was holding the ducks in her hand, and she looked up. 

“You miss your father,” Bokhee said. The sisters had lost their parents as little girls. 

Bokhee’s  broad  face  broke  into  a  sad  smile.  Her  tiny,  gracious  eyes, which  resembled  tadpoles,  pulled  downward  to  meet  her  knobby cheekbones.  The  sisters  had  almost  identical  faces;  the  younger  one  was shorter and slightly plump. 

Sunja wept and Dokhee folded her into her strong arms. 

“Abuji, my  abuji,” Sunja said quietly. 

“It’s all right, it’s all right,” Bokhee said, patting Sunja on the back. “You have a kind husband now.” 

Yangjin packed her daughter’s things herself. Every article of clothing was folded  with  care,  then  stacked  in  a  broad  square  of  fabric  to  form  a manageable bundle. The fabric corners were tied neatly into a loop handle. 

In the days before the couple left, Yangjin kept thinking that she’d forgotten something,  forcing  her  to  unpack  one  of  the  four  bundles  and  repeat  the process.  She  wanted  to  send  more  pantry  items  like  dried  jujubes,  chili flakes,  chili  paste,  large  dried  anchovies,  and  fermented  soybean  paste  to give  to  Isak’s  sister-in-law,  but  Isak  told  her  that  they  could  not  carry  too much on the ferry. “We can purchase things there,” he assured her. 

Bokhee  and  Dokhee  remained  at  the  house  on  the  morning  Yangjin, Sunja, and Isak went to the Busan ferry terminal. The good-byes with the sisters were difficult; Dokhee cried inconsolably, afraid that Yangjin might leave for Osaka and abandon the sisters in Yeongdo. 

The  Busan  ferry  terminal  was  a  utilitarian  brick  and  wooden  structure that had been built hastily. Passengers, family members who’d come to see them  off,  and  hawkers  milled  around  noisily  in  the  crowded  terminal. 

Immense lines of passengers waited to show their papers to the police and immigration officials before embarking on the Busan ferry to Shimonoseki. 

While Isak stood in line to speak to the police, the women sat on a bench nearby, ready to spring up in case he needed anything. The large ferry was already docked and waiting for the passengers’ inspections to be completed. 

The algae scent of the sea mingled with the fuel smells of the ferry; Sunja had been queasy since morning, and she looked sallow and exhausted. She had vomited earlier and had nothing left in her stomach. 

Yangjin held the smallest bundle close to her chest. When would she see her daughter again? she wondered. The whole world felt broken. What was better  for  Sunja  and  the  child  no  longer  seemed  to  matter.  Why  did  they have to go? Yangjin would not be able to hold her grandchild. Why couldn’t she go with them? There must be work for her in Osaka, she reasoned. But Yangjin knew she had to stay. It was her responsibility to care for her in-laws’ graves and her husband’s. She couldn’t leave Hoonie. Besides, where

would she stay in Osaka? 

Sunja doubled over slightly, emitting a little cry of pain. 

“Are you okay?” 

Sunja nodded. 

“I saw the gold watch,” Yangjin said. 

Sunja folded her arms and hugged herself. 

“Was it from that man?” 

“Yes,” Sunja said, not looking at her mother. 

“What kind of man can afford something like that?” 

Sunja didn’t reply. There were only a few men left in front of Isak in the line. 

“Where is the man who gave you the watch?” 

“He lives in Osaka.” 

“What? Is that where he’s from?” 

“He’s from Jeju, but he lives in Osaka. I don’t know if that’s where he is now.” 

“Are you planning on seeing him?” 

“No.” 

“You cannot see this man, Sunja. He abandoned you. He’s not good.” 

“He’s married.” 

Yangjin took a breath. 

Sunja  could  hear  herself  talking  to  her  mother,  yet  it  felt  like  she  was another person. 

“I didn’t know he was married. He didn’t tell me.” 

Yangjin sat still with her mouth opened slightly. 

“At  the  market,  some  Japanese  boys  were  bothering  me,  and  he  told them off. Then we became friends.” 

It felt natural to speak of him finally; she was always thinking of him but there had been no one to talk about him with. 

“He wanted to take care of me and the baby, but he couldn’t marry me. 

He said he had a wife and three children in Japan.” 

Yangjin took her daughter’s hand. 

“You  cannot  see  him.  That  man”—Yangjin  pointed  at  Isak—“that  man saved your life. He saved your child. You’re a member of his family. I’ve no right to ever see you again. Do you know what that’s like for a mother? 

Soon, you’ll be a mother. I hope that you’ll have a son who won’t have to

leave you when he marries.” 

Sunja nodded. 

“The watch. What will you do with it?” 

“I’ll sell it when I get to Osaka.” 

Yangjin was satisfied with this answer. 

“Save  it  for  an  emergency.  If  your  husband  asks  where  you  got  it,  tell him that I gave it to you.” 

Yangjin fumbled with the purse tucked beneath her blouse. 

“This belonged to your father’s mother.” Yangjin gave her the two gold rings her mother-in-law had given her before she died. 

“Try not to sell these unless you have to. You should have something in case  you  need  money.  You’re  a  thrifty  girl,  but  raising  a  child  requires money. There will be things you can’t expect, like doctor’s visits. If it’s a boy, you’ll need fees for school. If the pastor doesn’t give you money for the  household,  earn  something  and  put  aside  savings  for  emergencies. 

Spend what you need but just throw even a few coins into a tin and forget that you have it. A woman should always have something put by. Take good care of your husband. Otherwise, another woman will. Treat your husband’s family with reverence. Obey them. If you make mistakes, they’ll curse our family. Think of your kind father, who always did his best for us.” Yangjin tried to think of anything else she was supposed to tell her. It was hard to focus. 

Sunja slipped the rings into the fabric bag beneath her blouse where she kept her watch and money. 

“Omoni, I’m sorry.” 

“I  know,  I  know.”  Yangjin  closed  her  mouth  and  stroked  Sunja’s  hair. 

“You’re all I have. Now, I have nothing.” 

“I will ask Pastor Isak to write to you when we arrive.” 

“Yes, yes. And if you need anything, ask Isak to write me a letter in plain Korean, and I’ll ask someone in town to read it for me.” Yangjin sighed. “I wish we knew our letters.” 

“We know our numbers, and we can do sums. Father taught us.” 

Yangjin smiled. “Yes. Your father taught us. 

“Your  home  is  with  your  husband,”  Yangjin  said.  This  was  what  her father had told her when she married Hoonie. “Never come home again,” 

he’d  said  to  her,  but  Yangjin  couldn’t  say  this  to  her  own  child.  “Make  a

good home for him and your child. That’s your job. They must not suffer.” 

Isak returned, looking calm. Dozens of people had been turned away for lack of papers or fees, but Sunja and he were fine. Every item required had been satisfied. The officers could not trouble him. He and his wife could go. 

12

Osaka, April 1933

When Yoseb Baek tired of shifting his weight from one foot to the other, he  paced  about  the  Osaka  train  station  like  a  man  in  a  cell.  If  he’d  come with  a  friend,  he  would’ve  been  able  to  keep  still  just  by  shooting  the breeze, but he was alone. Yoseb was an easy talker by nature, and though his Japanese was better than proficient, his accent never failed to give him away. From appearances alone, he could approach any Japanese and receive a polite smile, but he’d lose the welcome as soon as he said anything. He was  a  Korean,  after  all,  and  no  matter  how  appealing  his  personality, unfortunately  he  belonged  to  a  cunning  and  wily  tribe.  There  were  many Japanese who were fair-minded and principled, but around foreigners they tended to be guarded.  The smart ones, especially, you have to watch out for those—Koreans are natural troublemakers.  After living in Japan for over a decade, Yoseb had heard it all. He didn’t dwell on these things; that seemed pathetic  to  him.  The  sentry  patrolling  Osaka  Station  had  noticed  Yoseb’s restlessness, but waiting anxiously for a train to arrive was not a crime. 

The police didn’t know he was a Korean, because Yoseb’s manner and dress  wouldn’t  have  given  him  away.  Most  Japanese  claimed  they  could distinguish between a Japanese and a Korean, but every Korean knew that was  rubbish.  You  could  ape  anyone.  Yoseb  wore  the  street  clothes  of  a modest workingman in Osaka—plain trousers, a Western-style dress shirt, and a heavy woolen coat that didn’t show its wear. Long ago, he’d put aside

the finery that he’d brought from Pyongyang—expensive suits his parents had ordered from a tailor who made clothes for the Canadian missionaries and  their  families.  For  the  past  six  years,  Yoseb  had  been  working  as  the foreman  at  a  biscuit  factory,  overseeing  thirty  girls  and  two  men.  For  his employment,  he  needed  to  be  neat—that  was  all.  He  didn’t  need  to  dress better  than  his  boss,  Shimamura-san,  who’d  made  it  plain  that  he  could replace Yoseb by morning. Every day, trains from Shimonoseki and boats from  Jeju  brought  more  hungry  Koreans  to  Osaka,  and  Shimamura-san could have the pick of the litter. 

Yoseb  was  grateful  that  his  younger  brother  was  arriving  on  a  Sunday, his only day off. Back home, Kyunghee was preparing a feast. Otherwise, she’d have tagged along. They were both terribly curious about the girl Isak had married. Her circumstances were shocking, but what Isak had decided to do was not at all surprising. No one in the family would have ever been taken  aback  by  Isak’s  acts  of  selflessness.  As  a  child,  he’d  been  the  kind who’d have sacrificed all his meals and possessions to the poor if allowed. 

The boy had spent his childhood in his sickbed reading. His abundant meals were sent to his room on a lacquered jujube tray. Yet he remained as slender as  a  chopstick,  though  every  grain  of  rice  would  have  been  picked  off  its metal  bowl  when  his  tray  was  returned  to  the  kitchen.  Naturally,  the servants had never gone without a sizable portion of his meals, which Isak had  given  away  deliberately.  Your  rice  and  fish  were  one  thing,  Yoseb thought,  but  this  marriage  seemed  excessive.  To  agree  to  father  another man’s  child!  His  wife,  Kyunghee,  had  made  him  promise  to  reserve judgment until they had a chance to get to know her. She, much like Isak, was tenderhearted to a fault. 

When  the  Shimonoseki  train  arrived  at  the  station,  the  awaiting  crowd dispersed  with  a  kind  of  organized  precision.  Porters  dashed  to  help  first-class passengers; everyone else seemed to know where to go. A head taller than the others, Isak stood out from the mob. A gray trilby was cocked on his beautiful head, and his tortoiseshell glasses were set low on his straight nose. Isak scanned the crowd and, spotting Yoseb, he waved his bony right hand high in the air. 

Yoseb  rushed  to  him.  The  boy  had  become  an  adult.  Isak  was  even thinner than he last remembered; his pale skin was more olive, and radial lines  had  surfaced  around  his  gentle,  smiling  eyes.  Isak  had  their  brother

Samoel’s face; it was uncanny. The Western suit, handmade by the family tailor, hung slack on his drawn frame. The shy, sickly boy Yoseb had left eleven years ago had grown into a tall gentleman, his gaunt body depleted further  by  his  recent  illness.  How  could  his  parents  have  let  him  come  to Osaka? Why had Yoseb insisted? 

Yoseb wrapped his arms around his brother and pulled him close. Here, the  only  other  person  Yoseb  ever  touched  was  his  wife,  and  it  was gratifying  to  have  his  kin  so  near—to  be  able  to  feel  the  stubble  of  his brother’s face brush against his own ears. His little brother had facial hair, Yoseb marveled. 

“You grew a lot!” 

They both laughed because it was true and because it had been far too long since they had last seen each other. 

“Brother,” Isak said. “My brother.” 

“Isak, you’re here. I’m so glad.” 

Isak beamed, his eyes fixed to his elder brother’s face. 

“But you’ve grown much bigger than me. That’s disrespectful!” 

Isak bowed waist-deep in mock apology. 

Sunja  stood  there  holding  her  bundles.  She  was  comforted  by  the brothers’  ease  and  warmth.  Isak’s  brother  Yoseb  was  funny.  His  joking reminded  her  a  little  of  Fatso,  the  boardinghouse  guest.  When  Fatso  first learned that she’d married Isak, he had pretended to faint, making a  splat sound on the floor of the front room. Moments later, he took out his wallet and gave her two yen—over two days of a workman’s wages—telling her to buy something tasty to eat with her husband when she got to Osaka. “When you’re  munching  on  sweet  rice  cakes  in  Japan,  remember  me,  lonely  and sad in Yeongdo, missing you; imagine Fatso’s heart torn out like the mouth of  a  sea  bass  hooked  too  young.”  He  had  pretended  to  cry,  rubbing  his meaty fists into his eyes and making loud  boo-hoo noises. His brothers had told  him  to  shut  up,  and  each  of  them  had  also  given  her  two  yen  as  a wedding present. 

“And  you’re  married!”  Yoseb  said,  looking  carefully  at  the  small  girl beside Isak. 

Sunja bowed to her brother-in-law. 

“It’s good to meet you again,” Yoseb said. “You were just a little thing, though; you used to follow your father around. Maybe you were five or six? 

I don’t think you can remember me.” 

Sunja shook her head because she had tried but couldn’t. 

“I remember your father very well. I was sorry to hear about his death; he was a very wise man. I enjoyed talking with him. He didn’t have extra words, but everything he said was well considered. And your mother made the most outstanding meals.” 

Sunja lowered her eyes. 

“Thank you for letting me come here, Elder Brother. My mother sends her deepest thanks for your generosity.” 

“You and your mother saved Isak’s life. I’m grateful to you, Sunja. Our family is grateful to your family.” 

Yoseb took the heavy suitcases from Isak, and Isak took Sunja’s lighter bundles. Yoseb noticed that her stomach protruded, but her pregnancy was not  entirely  obvious.  He  looked  away  in  the  direction  of  the  station  exits. 

The girl didn’t look or talk like some village harlot. She seemed so modest and  plain  that  Yoseb  wondered  if  she  could  have  been  raped  by  someone she knew. That sort of thing happened, and the girl might have been blamed for having misled a fellow. 

“Where’s Sister?” Isak asked, looking around for Kyunghee. 

“At  home,  cooking  your  dinner.  You  better  be  hungry.  The  neighbors must be dying of jealousy from the smells coming from the kitchen!” 

Isak smiled; he adored his sister-in-law. 

Sunja pulled her jacket closer to her body, aware of the passersby staring at her traditional dress. No one else in the station was wearing a  hanbok. 

“My sister-in-law’s a wonderful cook,” Isak said to Sunja, happy at the thought of seeing Kyunghee again. 

Yoseb  noticed  the  people  staring  at  the  girl.  She’d  need  clothes,  he realized. 

“Let’s go home!” Yoseb guided them out of the station in no time. 

The road opposite the Osaka station was teeming with streetcars; hordes of  pedestrians  streamed  in  and  out  of  the  main  entrances.  Sunja  walked behind  the  brothers,  who  darted  carefully  through  the  crowd.  As  they walked toward the trolley, she turned back for a moment and caught sight of the train station. The Western-style building was like nothing she had ever seen  before—a  stone  and  concrete  behemoth.  The  Shimonoseki  station, which  she’d  thought  was  big,  was  puny  compared  to  this  immense

structure. 

The men walked quickly, and she tried to keep up. The trolley car was approaching. In her mind, she had been to Osaka before. In her mind, she had ridden the Shimonoseki ferry, the Osaka train, and even the trolley that could  outpace  a  boy  running  or  cycling.  As  cars  drove  past  them,  she marveled  that  they  did  look  like  metal  bulls  on  wheels,  which  was  what Hansu  had  called  them.  She  was  a  country  girl,  but  she  had  heard  of  all these  things.  Yet  she  could  not  let  on  that  she  knew  of  uniformed  ticket collectors,  immigration  officers,  porters,  and  of  trolleys,  electric  lamps, kerosene stoves, and telephones, so at the trolley stop, Sunja remained quiet and still like a seedling sprouting from new soil, upright and open to collect the light. She would have uprooted herself to have seen the world with him, and now she was seeing it without him. 

Yoseb directed Sunja to the only empty seat at the back of the trolley and deposited her there. She took back the bundles from Isak and held them in her lap. The brothers stood close to each other and caught each other up on family  news.  Sunja  didn’t  pay  any  mind  to  the  men’s  conversation.  As before,  she  held  her  bundles  close  to  her  heart  and  belly  to  inhale  the lingering scent of home on the fabric covering their possessions. 

The wide streets of downtown Osaka were lined with rows of low brick buildings and smart-looking shops. The Japanese who had settled in Busan resembled the ones here, but there were many more kinds of them. At the station,  there  were  young  men  in  fancy  Western  suits  that  made  Isak’s clothing  look  dated  and  fusty,  and  beautiful  women  wearing  glorious kimonos  that  would  have  made  Dokhee  swoon  with  pleasure  at  their exceptional  colors  and  embroidery.  There  were  also  very  poor-looking people  who  must  have  been  Japanese—that  was  something  she  had  never seen in Busan. Men spat in the streets casually. The trolley ride felt brief to her. 

They got off at Ikaino, the ghetto where the Koreans lived. When they reached Yoseb’s home, it looked vastly different from the nice houses she’d passed  by  on  the  trolley  ride  from  the  station.  The  animal  stench  was stronger than the smell of food cooking or even the odors of the outhouses. 

Sunja wanted to cover her nose and mouth, but kept from doing so. 

Ikaino  was  a  misbegotten  village  of  sorts,  comprised  of  mismatched, shabby houses. The shacks were uniform in their poorly built manner and

flimsy  materials.  Here  and  there,  a  stoop  had  been  washed  or  a  pair  of windows polished, but the majority of the facades were in disrepair. Matted newspapers  and  tar  paper  covered  the  windows  from  inside,  and  wooden shims were used to seal up the cracks. The metal used on the roof was often rusted through. The houses appeared to have been put up by the residents themselves using cheap or found materials—not much sturdier than huts or tents.  Smoke  vented  from  makeshift  steel  chimneys.  It  was  warm  for  a spring  evening;  children,  half-dressed  in  rags,  played  tag,  ignoring  the drunken man asleep in the alley. A small boy defecated by a stoop not far from Yoseb’s house. 

Yoseb  and  Kyunghee  lived  in  a  boxlike  shack  with  a  slightly  pitched roof. Its wooden frame was covered with corrugated steel. A plywood panel with a metal covering served as the front door. 

“This place is fit for only pigs and Koreans,” Yoseb said, laughing. “It’s not quite like home, is it?” 

“No, but it’ll do very well for us,” Isak said, smiling. “I’m sorry for the inconvenience we’ll be causing.” 

Sunja couldn’t believe how poorly Yoseb and his wife lived. It could not be  possible  that  a  foreman  of  a  factory  could  live  in  such  impoverished quarters. 

“The Japanese won’t rent decent properties to us. We bought this house eight years ago. I think we’re the only Koreans who own a house on this row, but no one can know that.” 

“Why?” Isak asked. 

“It’s  not  good  to  let  on  that  you’re  an  owner.  The  landlords  here  are bastards; that’s all everyone complains about. I bought this with the money Father gave me when I moved out here. I couldn’t afford to buy it now.” 

Pig  squeals  came  from  the  house  next  door  with  the  tar-papered windows. 

“Yes, our neighbor raises pigs. They live with her and her children.” 

“How many children?” 

“Four children and three pigs.” 

“All in there?” Isak whispered. 

Yoseb nodded, raising his eyebrows. 

“It  can’t  be  that  expensive  to  live  here,”  Isak  said.  He  had  planned  on renting a house for Sunja, himself, and the baby. 

“Tenants pay more than half their earnings on rent. The food prices are much higher than back home.” 

Hansu  owned  many  properties  in  Osaka.  How  did  he  do  that?  she wondered. 

The side door that led to the kitchen opened, and Kyunghee looked out. 

She put down the pail she was carrying by the doorstep. 

“What!  What  are  you  doing  standing  outside?  Come  in,  come  in!  Uh-muh!” Kyunghee cried out loud. She rushed over to Isak and held his face in her hands. “Uh-muh, I’m so happy. You’re here! Praise God!” 

“Amen,” Isak said, letting himself be petted over by Kyunghee, who’d known him since he was an infant. 

“The  last  time  I  saw  you  was  right  before  I  left  home!  Go  inside  the house now!” she ordered Isak playfully, then turned to Sunja. 

“You don’t know how long I’ve wanted a sister. I’ve been so lonely here wanting  to  talk  to  a  girl!”  Kyunghee  said.  “I  was  worried  that  you  didn’t make your train. How are you? Are you tired? You must be hungry.” 

Kyunghee took Sunja’s hand in hers, and the men followed the women. 

Sunja  hadn’t  expected  this  warmth.  Kyunghee  had  a  remarkably  pretty face—eyes  shaped  and  colored  like  persimmon  seeds  and  a  beautiful mouth.  She  had  the  complexion  of  white  peonies.  She  appeared  far  more appealing  and  vibrant  than  Sunja,  who  was  more  than  a  dozen  years younger. Her dark, smooth hair was rolled up with a wooden hairpin, and Kyunghee wore a cotton apron over her plain blue Western-style dress. She looked like a wispy schoolgirl more than a thirty-one-year-old housewife. 

Kyunghee  reached  for  the  brass  teakettle  resting  above  the  kerosene heater.  “Did  you  get  them  something  to  drink  or  eat  at  the  station?”  she asked her husband. She poured tea into four terra-cotta cups. 

He laughed. “You said to come home as fast as possible!” 

“What  a  brother  you  are!  Never  mind.  I’m  too  happy  to  nag.  You brought them home.” Kyunghee stood close by Sunja and stroked her hair. 

The girl had an ordinary, flat face and thin eyes. Her features were small. 

Sunja  was  not  ugly,  but  not  attractive  in  any  obvious  way.  Her  face  and neck were puffy and her ankles heavily swollen. Sunja looked nervous, and Kyunghee  felt  sorry  for  her  and  wanted  her  to  know  that  she  needn’t  be anxious. Two long braids hanging down Sunja’s back were bound with thin strips of ordinary hemp. Her stomach was high; and Kyunghee guessed that

the child might be a boy. 

Kyunghee passed her the tea, and Sunja bowed as she accepted the cup with two shaky hands. 

“Are you cold? You’re not wearing much.” Kyunghee put down a floor cushion near the low dining table and made the girl sit there. She wrapped a quilt the color of green apples over Sunja’s lap. Sunja sipped her hot barley tea. 

The  exterior  of  the  house  belied  its  comfortable  interior.  Kyunghee, who’d grown up in a household with many servants, had taught herself to keep a clean and inviting house for her and her husband. They owned a six-mat house with three rooms for just the two of them, which was unheard-of in this crowded Korean enclave where ten could sleep in a two-mat room; nevertheless, compared to the grand houses where she and her husband had grown up, their house was absurdly small, not fit for an aging servant. The couple  had  bought  the  house  from  a  very  poor  Japanese  widow  who  had moved  to  Seoul  with  her  son  when  Kyunghee  arrived  to  join  Yoseb  in Osaka.  There  were  many  different  kinds  of  Koreans  who  lived  in  Ikaino, and they had learned to be wary of the deceitfulness and criminality among them. 

“Never  lend  anyone  money,”  Yoseb  said,  looking  straight  at  Isak,  who appeared puzzled by this order. 

“Can’t we discuss these things after they’ve eaten? They just got here,” 

Kyunghee pleaded. 

“If you have extra money or valuables, let me know. We’ll put it aside. I have a bank account. Everyone who lives here needs money, clothes, rent, and food; there’s very little you can do to fix all of their problems. We’ll give to the church—no different than how we were raised—but the church has  to  hand  things  out.  You  don’t  understand  what  it’s  like  here.  Try  to avoid  talking  to  the  neighbors,  and  never  ever  let  anyone  in  the  house,” 

Yoseb said soberly to Isak and Sunja. 

“I expect you to respect these rules, Isak. You’re a generous person, but it can be dangerous for us. If people think we have extra, our house will be robbed.  We  don’t  have  a  lot,  Isak.  We  have  to  be  very  careful,  too.  Once you start giving, it will never stop. Some people here drink and gamble; the mothers are desperate when the money runs out. I don’t blame them, but we must take care of our parents and Kyunghee’s parents first.” 

“He’s saying all this because I got us in trouble,” Kyunghee said. 

“What do you mean?” Isak asked. 

“I gave food to the neighbors when I first got here, and soon they were asking  us  every  day,  and  I  was  giving  away  our  dinners,  and  they  didn’t understand when I had to keep back some food for your brother’s lunch the next day; then one day, they broke into our house and took our last bag of potatoes. They said it wasn’t them, someone they knew—” 

“They were hungry,” Isak said, trying to understand. 

Yoseb looked angry. 

“We’re  all  hungry.  They  were  stealing.  You  have  to  be  careful.  Just because they’re Korean doesn’t mean they’re our friends. Be extra careful around other Koreans; the bad ones know that the police won’t listen to our complaints. Our house has been broken into twice. Kyunghee has lost her jewelry.” Yoseb stared at Isak again with warning in his eyes. 

“And the women are home all day. I never keep money or other valuable things in the house.” 

Kyunghee said nothing else. It had never occurred to her that giving up a few  meals  would  lead  to  her  wedding  ring  and  her  mother’s  jade  hairpin and bracelets being stolen. After the house was broken into the second time, Yoseb was angry with her for days. 

“I’ll fry the fish now. Why don’t we talk as we eat?” she said, smiling, heading to the tiny kitchen by the back door. 

“Sister, may I please help you?” Sunja asked. 

Kyunghee nodded and patted her back. 

She whispered, “Don’t be afraid of the neighbors. They’re good people. 

My  husband—I  mean,  your  brother-in-law—is  right  to  be  cautious.  He knows  more  about  these  things.  He  doesn’t  want  us  to  mingle  with  the people  who  live  here,  so  I  don’t.  I’ve  been  so  alone.  I’m  so  glad  you’re here. And there will be a baby!” Kyunghee’s eyes lit up. “There will be a child in this house, and I’ll be an aunt. What a blessing this is.” 

The  heartbreak  in  Kyunghee’s  beautiful  face  was  obvious,  but  her suffering and privation had made her finer in a way. In all these years, there had  been  no  child  for  them,  and  Isak  had  told  Sunja  that  this  was  all Kyunghee and Yoseb had ever wanted. 

The  kitchen  was  no  more  than  a  stove,  a  pair  of  washtubs,  and  a workbench that doubled as a cutting board—the space was a fraction of the

size of the kitchen in Yeongdo. There was just enough room for the two of them  to  stand  side  by  side,  but  they  could  not  move  about  much.  Sunja rolled up her sleeves and washed her hands with the hose in the makeshift sink by the floor. The boiled vegetables had to be dressed, and the fish had to be fried. 

“Sunja-ya—”  Kyunghee  touched  her  forearm  lightly.  “We’ll  always  be sisters.” 

The young woman nodded gratefully, devotion already taking root in her heart. The sight of the prepared dishes made her hungry for the first time in days. 

Kyunghee picked up a pot lid—white rice. 

“Just for today. For your first night. This is your home now.” 

13

After dinner, the two couples walked to the public bathhouse, where the men and women bathed separately. The bathers were Japanese mostly, and they refused to acknowledge Kyunghee and Sunja. This had been expected. 

After scrubbing away the dirt of the long journey and having a long soak, Sunja  felt  elated.  They  put  on  clean  undergarments  beneath  their  street clothes and walked home, clean and ready to sleep. Yoseb sounded hopeful

—yes,  life  in  Osaka  would  be  difficult,  but  things  would  change  for  the better. They’d make a tasty broth from stones and bitterness. The Japanese could  think  what  they  wanted  about  them,  but  none  of  it  would  matter  if they survived and succeeded. There were four of them now, Kyunghee said, and soon five—they were stronger because they were together. “Right?” she said. 

Kyunghee linked arms with Sunja. They walked closely behind the men. 

Yoseb  warned  his  brother:  “Don’t  get  mixed  up  in  the  politics,  labor organizing, or any such nonsense. Keep your head down and work. Don’t pick up or accept any of the independence-movement or socialist tracts. If the police find that stuff on you, you’ll get picked up and put in jail. I’ve seen it all.” 

Isak  had  been  too  young  and  ill  to  participate  in  the  March  1

Independence  Movement,  but  many  of  its  founding  fathers  had  been graduates  of  his  seminary  in  Pyongyang.  Many  of  the  seminary  teachers had marched in 1919. 

“Are there many activists here?” Isak whispered, though no one on the road was nearby. 

“Yeah,  I  think  so.  More  in  Tokyo  and  some  hiding  out  in  Manchuria. 

Anyway,  when  those  guys  get  caught,  they  die.  If  you’re  lucky,  you  get

deported, but that’s rare. You better not do any of that stuff under my roof. 

That’s not why I invited you to Osaka. You have a job at the church.” 

Isak stared at Yoseb, who was raising his voice. 

“You won’t give the activists a minute. Right?” Yoseb said sternly. “It’s not just you now. You have to think of your wife and child.” 

Back home in Pyongyang, when Isak had been feeling strong enough to make the journey to Osaka, he had considered reaching out to the patriots fighting against colonization. Things were getting worse at home; even his parents had been selling parcels of their property to pay taxes from the new land surveys. Yoseb was sending them money now. Isak believed that it was Christlike  to  resist  oppression.  But  in  a  few  months,  everything  had changed for Isak. These ideals seemed secondary to his job and Sunja. He had to think of the safety of others. 

Isak’s silence worried Yoseb. 

“The  military  police  will  harass  you  until  you  give  up  or  die,”  Yoseb said. “And your health, Isak. You have to be careful not to get sick again. 

I’ve  seen  men  arrested  here.  It’s  not  like  back  home.  The  judges  here  are Japanese.  The  police  are  Japanese.  The  laws  aren’t  clear.  And  you  can’t always trust the Koreans in these independence groups. There are spies who work  both  sides.  The  poetry  discussion  groups  have  spies,  and  there  are spies in churches, too. Eventually, each activist is picked off like ripe fruit from the same stupid tree. They’ll force you to sign a confession. Do you understand?” Yoseb slowed down his walking. 

From behind, Kyunghee touched her husband’s sleeve. 

“Yobo,  you  worry  too  much.  Isak’s  not  going  to  get  mixed  up  in  such things. Let’s not spoil their first night.” 

Yoseb  nodded,  but  the  anxiety  in  his  body  felt  out  of  control,  and warning  his  brother—even  if  it  meant  sounding  hysterical—felt  necessary to dissipate some of that worry. Yoseb remembered how good it was before the Japanese came—he was ten years old when the country was colonized; and  yet  he  couldn’t  do  what  their  elder  brother,  Samoel,  had  done  so bravely—fight  and  end  up  as  a  martyr.  Protesting  was  for  young  men without families. 

“Mother and Father will kill me if you get sick again or get into trouble. 

That will be on your conscience. You want me dead?” 

Isak  swung  his  left  arm  around  his  elder  brother’s  shoulder  and

embraced him. 

“I think you’ve gotten shorter,” Isak said, smiling. 

“Are you listening to me?” Yoseb said quietly. 

“I promise to be good. I promise to listen to you. You mustn’t worry so much. Your hair will gray, or you will lose what’s left of it.” 

Yoseb  laughed.  This  was  what  he  had  needed—to  have  his  younger brother near him. It was good to have someone who knew him this way and to be teased even. His wife was a treasure, but it was different to have this person who’d known you almost from birth. The thought of losing Isak to the  murky  world  of  politics  had  scared  him  into  lecturing  his  younger brother on his first night in Osaka. 

“A real Japanese bath. It’s wonderful,” Isak said. “It’s a great thing about this country. Isn’t it?” 

Yoseb nodded, praying inside that Isak would never come to any harm. 

His unqualified pleasure at his brother’s arrival was short-lived; he hadn’t realized what it would mean to worry about another person in this way. 

On  their  walk  home,  Kyunghee  told  Isak  and  Sunja  about  the  famous noodle  shops  near  the  train  station  and  promised  to  take  them.  Once  they returned  to  the  house,  Kyunghee  turned  on  the  lights,  and  Sunja remembered that this was now where she lived. The street outside was quiet and dark, and the tiny shack was lit with a clean, bright warmth. Isak and Sunja went to their room, and Kyunghee said good night, closing the panel door behind them. 

Their  windowless  room  was  just  big  enough  for  a  futon  and  a  steamer trunk converted into a dresser. Fresh paper covered the low walls; the tatami mats  had  been  brushed  and  wiped  down  by  hand;  and  Kyunghee  had plumped  up  the  quilts  with  new  cotton  padding.  The  room  had  its  own kerosene heater, a midpriced model that was nicer than the one in the main room,  where  Kyunghee  and  Yoseb  slept,  and  it  emitted  a  steady,  calming hum. 

Isak and Sunja would sleep on the same pallet. Before Sunja left home, her mother had spoken to her about sex as if everything was new to her; she explained  what  a  husband  expected;  and  she  said  that  relations  were allowed  when  pregnant.  Do  what  you  can  to  please  your  husband.  Men need to have sex. 

A single electric bulb hung from the ceiling and cast a pale glow about

the room. Sunja glanced at it, and Isak looked up, too. 

“You must be tired,” he said. 

“I’m fine.” 

Sunja crouched down to open up the folded pallet and quilt on the floor. 

What would it be like to sleep beside Isak, who was now her husband? The bed was made up quickly, but they were still wearing street clothes. Sunja pulled  out  her  nightclothes  from  her  clothing  bundle—a  white  muslin nightgown  her  mother  had  fashioned  from  two  old  slips.  How  would  she change? She knelt by the pallet, the gown in her hands. 

“Would you like me to turn out the light?” he asked. 

“Yes.” 

Isak pulled the chain cord, and the switch made a loud clicking sound. 

The  room  was  still  suffused  with  the  dim  glow  from  the  adjoining  room, separated by a paper screen door. On the other side of the thin wall was the street; pedestrians talked loudly; the pigs next door squealed now and then. 

It  felt  like  the  street  was  inside  rather  than  out.  Isak  removed  his  clothes, keeping on his underwear to sleep in—intimate garments Sunja had already seen, since she’d been doing his wash for months. She had already seen him vomit, have diarrhea, and cough up blood—aspects of illness that no young wife  should  have  had  to  witness  so  early  on  in  a  relationship.  In  a  way, they’d  been  living  together  longer  and  more  intimately  than  most  people who  got  married,  and  each  had  seen  the  other  in  deeply  compromised situations.  They  shouldn’t  feel  nervous  around  the  other,  he  told  himself. 

And yet Isak was uncomfortable. He had never slept next to a woman, and though  he  knew  what  should  happen,  he  was  not  entirely  sure  of  how  it should begin. 

Sunja  removed  her  day  clothes.  At  the  bathhouse  under  the  electric lights, she had been alarmed by the darkening vertical stripe reaching from her  pubis  to  the  base  of  her  round,  sloping  breasts.  She  put  on  her nightgown. 

Like  children  fresh  from  their  baths,  Isak  and  Sunja  slipped  quickly beneath the blue-and-white quilt, carrying with them the scent of soap. 

Sunja wanted to say something to him, but she didn’t know what. They’d started off with him being ill, her having done something shameful, and him saving  her.  Perhaps  here  in  their  new  home,  they  could  each  begin  again. 

Lying in this room that Kyunghee had made for them, Sunja felt hopeful. It

occurred to her that she’d been trying to bring Hansu back by remembering him, but that didn’t make sense. She wanted to devote herself to Isak and her child. To do that, she would have to forget Hansu. 

“Your family is very kind.” 

“I  wish  you  could  meet  my  parents,  too.  Father  is  like  my  brother—

good-natured and honest. My mother is wise; she seems reserved, but she’d protect you with her life. She thinks Kyunghee is right about everything and always takes her side.” He laughed quietly. 

Sunja nodded, wondering how her mother was. 

Isak leaned his head closer to her pillow, and she held her breath. 

Could he have desire for her? she wondered. How was that possible? 

Isak  noticed  that  when  Sunja  worried,  she  furrowed  her  brow  like  she was trying to see better. He liked being with her; she was capable and level-headed. She was not helpless, and that was appealing because, although he wasn’t  helpless  himself,  Isak  knew  that  he  was  not  always  sensible.  Her competence  would  be  good  for  what  his  father  had  once  termed  Isak’s

“impractical  nature.”  Their  journey  from  Busan  would  have  been  difficult for  anyone,  let  alone  a  pregnant  woman,  but  she  hadn’t  whimpered  a complaint or spoken a cross word. Whenever he forgot to eat or drink, or to put on his coat, she reminded him with no trace of rebuke. Isak knew how to talk with people, to ask questions, and to hear the concerns in a person’s voice; she seemed to understand how to survive, and this was something he did not always know how to do. He needed her; a man needed a wife. 

“I feel well today. My chest doesn’t have that pulling feeling,” he said. 

“Maybe it was the bath. And that good dinner. I don’t remember having eaten so well. We had white rice twice this month. I feel like a rich person.” 

Isak laughed. “I wish I could get white rice for you every day.” In the service of the Lord, Isak wasn’t supposed to care about what to eat, where to sleep, or what to wear, but now that he was married, he thought he ought to care about her needs. 

“No, no. I didn’t mean that. I was just surprised by it. It’s not necessary for  us  to  eat  such  luxurious  things.”  Sunja  berated  herself  privately,  not wanting him to think that she was spoiled. 

“I like white rice, too,” he said, though he rarely gave much thought to what he ate. He wanted to touch her shoulder to comfort her and wouldn’t have hesitated if they were dressed, but lying so close and wearing so little, 

he kept his hands by his sides. 

She wanted to keep talking. It felt easier to whisper to him in the dark; it had felt awkward to talk on the ferry or train when all they had was time for longer conversations. 

“Your brother is very interesting; my mother had mentioned that he told funny stories and made Father laugh—” 

“I  shouldn’t  have  favorites,  but  he’s  always  been  my  closer  sibling. 

When we were growing up, he was scolded a lot because he hated going to school.  Brother  had  trouble  with  reading  and  writing,  but  he’s  good  with people and has a remarkable memory. He never forgets anything he hears and  can  pick  up  most  languages  after  just  a  little  while  of  hearing  it.  He knows some Chinese, English, and Russian, too. He’s always been good at fixing machines. Everyone in our town loved him, and no one wanted him to  go  to  Japan.  My  father  wanted  him  to  be  a  doctor,  but  of  course  that wasn’t  possible  if  he  wasn’t  good  at  sitting  still  and  studying.  The schoolmasters  chastised  him  all  the  time  for  not  trying  hard  enough.  He used  to  wish  that  he  was  the  one  who  was  sick  and  had  to  stay  home. 

Schoolmasters  came  to  the  house  to  teach  me  my  lessons,  and  sometimes he’d get me to do his work for him when he’d skip school to go fishing or swimming with his buddies. I think he left for Osaka to avoid fighting with Father. He wanted to make a fortune, and he knew he’d never be a doctor. 

He  couldn’t  see  how  he’d  ever  make  any  money  in  Korea  when  honest Koreans were losing property every day.” 

Neither of them spoke, and they listened to the street noises—a woman yelling at her children to come inside, a group of tipsy men singing off-key, 

“Arirang,  arirang,  arariyo—”  Soon,  they  could  hear  Yoseb’s  snoring  and Kyunghee’s light, steady breathing as if they were lying beside them. 

Isak  put  his  right  hand  on  her  belly  but  felt  no  movement.  She  never spoke about the baby, but Isak often wondered what must be happening to the growing child. 

“A child is a gift from the Lord,” he said. 

“It must be, I think.” 

“Your stomach feels warm,” he said. 

The skin on the palms of her hands was rough with calluses, but the skin on her belly was smooth and taut like fine fabric. He was with his wife, and he should have been more sure of himself, but he wasn’t. Between his legs, 

his cock had grown to its full measure—this thing that had happened to him each morning since he was a boy felt different now that he was lying beside a woman. Of course, he had imagined what this might be like, but what he hadn’t anticipated was the warmth, the nearness of her breath, and the fear that  she  might  dislike  him.  His  hand  covered  her  breast—its  shape  plush and heavy. Her breath changed. 

Sunja tried to relax; Hansu had never touched her like this with such care and gentleness. When she’d met him at the cove, sex was initiated in haste, with  her  not  knowing  what  it  was  supposed  to  mean—the  awkward thrusting, his face changing with relief and gratitude, then the need to wash her legs in cold seawater. He used to stroke her jawline and neck with his hands. He had liked to touch her hair. Once, he wanted her to take her hair out of her braids and she did so, but it had made her late in returning home. 

Within her body, his child was resting and growing, and he could not feel this because he was gone. 

Sunja opened her eyes; Isak’s eyes were open, too, and he was smiling at her, his hand rubbing her nipple; she quickened at his touch. 

“Yobo,” he said. 

He was her husband, and she would love him. 

14

Early next morning, using the map his brother Yoseb had drawn for him on a scrap of butcher paper, Isak found the Hanguk Presbyterian Church—a slanted wooden frame house in the back streets of Ikaino, a few steps away from  the  main   shotengai—its  only  distinguishing  mark  a  humble  white cross painted on its brown wooden door. 

Sexton Hu, a young Chinese man raised by Pastor Yoo, led Isak to the church office. Pastor Yoo was counseling a brother and sister. Hu and Isak waited  by  the  office  door.  The  young  woman  was  speaking  in  low  tones, and Yoo nodded sympathetically. 

“Should I return later?” Isak asked Hu quietly. 

“No, sir.” 

Hu, a matter-of-fact sort of person, examined the new minister carefully: Pastor Baek Isak did not look very strong. Hu was impressed by the man’s obvious handsomeness, but Hu believed that a man in the prime of his life should  have  greater  physical  stature.  Pastor  Yoo  was  once  a  much  larger man, able to run long distances and play soccer skillfully. He was older now and diminished in size; he suffered from cataracts and glaucoma. 

“Each morning, Pastor Yoo has been asking for any word from you. We didn’t  know  when  you’d  come.  If  we’d  known  that  you  were  arriving yesterday, I would’ve come to pick you up at the station.” Hu was no older than  twenty;  he  spoke  Japanese  and  Korean  very  well  and  had  the mannerisms of a much older man. Hu wore a shabby white dress shirt with a  blown-out  collar,  tucked  into  a  pair  of  brown  woolen  trousers.  His  dark blue  sweater  was  knit  from  heavy  wool  and  patched  in  places.  He  was wearing  the  winter  remnants  of  Canadian  missionaries  who  hadn’t  had much themselves. 

Isak turned away to cough. 

“My child, who is that with you?” Yoo turned his head to the voices by the  door  and  pushed  up  his  heavy  horn-rimmed  eyeglasses  closer  to  his face, though doing so hardly helped to sharpen his vision. Behind the milky gray cast clouding his eyes, his expression remained calm and certain. His hearing  was  acute.  He  could  not  make  out  the  shapes  by  the  door,  but  he knew that one of them was Hu, the Manchurian orphan who’d been left at the church by a Japanese officer, and that the man he was speaking with had an unfamiliar voice. 

“It’s Pastor Baek,” Hu said. 

The siblings seated on the floor by the pastor turned around and bowed. 

Yoo  felt  impatient  to  end  the  meeting  with  the  brother  and  sister,  who were no closer to a resolution. 

“Come to me, Isak. It’s not so easy for me to reach you.” 

Isak obeyed. 

“You have come at last. Hallelujah.” Yoo put his right hand lightly over Isak’s head. 

“The Lord bless you, my dear child.” 

“I’m sorry to have kept you waiting. I arrived in Osaka last night,” Isak said. The elder pastor’s unfocused pupils were ringed with silver. He wasn’t blind,  but  the  condition  was  severe.  Despite  his  nearly  lost  vision,  the minister appeared vigorous; his seated posture was straight and firm. 

“My son, come closer.” 

Isak  drew  near,  and  the  older  man  clasped  Isak’s  hands  at  first,  then cradled his face between his thick palms. 

The  brother  and  sister  looked  on  without  saying  anything.  By  the transom  of  the  door,  Hu  sat  on  bended  knees,  waiting  for  Yoo’s  next instruction. 

“You were sent to me, you know,” Yoo said. 

“Thank you for allowing me to come.” 

“I’m pleased that you’re here at last. Did you bring your wife? Hu read me your letter.” 

“She’s at home today. She will be here on Sunday.” 

“Yes, yes.” The older man nodded. “The congregation will be so pleased to have you here. Ah, you should meet this family!” 

The siblings bowed again to Isak. They’d noticed that the pastor looked

happier than they’d ever seen him. 

“They’ve come to see us about a family matter,” Yoo said to Isak, then turned to the siblings. 

The  sister  did  little  to  hide  her  irritation.  The  brother  and  sister  were from a rural village in Jeju, and they were far less formal than young people from cities. The dark-skinned girl with the thick black hair was wholesome looking;  she  was  remarkably  pretty  while  appearing  very  innocent.  She wore a long-sleeved white shirt buttoned to the collar and a pair of indigo-colored  mompei. 

“This  is  the  new  associate  pastor,  Baek  Isak.  Should  we  ask  for  his counsel, too?” From the tone of Yoo’s voice, there was no possibility of the siblings’ dissent. 

Isak  smiled  at  them.  The  sister  was  twenty  or  so;  the  brother  was younger. 

The matter was complicated but not out of the ordinary. The brother and sister had been arguing about money. The sister had been accepting gifts of money  from  a  Japanese  manager  at  the  textile  factory  where  she  worked. 

Older than their father, the manager was married with five children. He took the  sister  to  restaurants  and  gave  her  trinkets  and  cash.  The  girl  sent  the entire  sum  to  their  parents  living  with  an  indigent  uncle  back  home.  The brother  felt  it  was  wrong  to  take  anything  beyond  her  salary;  the  sister disagreed. 

“What  does  he  want  from  her?”  the  brother  asked  Isak  bluntly.  “She should be made to stop. This is a sin.” 

Yoo craned his head lower, feeling exhausted by their intransigence. 

The sister was furious that she had to be here at all, having to listen to her younger brother’s accusations. “The Japanese took our uncle’s farm. We can’t work at home because there are no jobs; if a Japanese man wants to give me some pocket money to have dinner with him, I don’t see the harm,” 

the sister said. “I’d take double what he gives me if I could. He doesn’t give that much.” 

“He  expects  something,  and  he’s  cheap,”  said  the  brother,  looking disgusted. 

“I’d never let Yoshikawa-san touch me. I sit, smile, and listen to him talk about  his  family  and  his  work.”  She  didn’t  mention  that  she  poured  his drinks and wore the rouge that he bought for her, which she scrubbed off

before coming home. 

“He  pays  you  to  flirt  with  him.  This  is  how  a  whore  behaves.”  The brother  was  shouting  now.  “Good  women  don’t  go  to  restaurants  with married men! While we work in Japan, Father said I’m in charge and must watch out for my sister. What does it matter that she’s older? She’s a girl and I’m a man; I can’t let this continue. I won’t allow it!” 

The  brother  was  four  years  younger  than  his  nineteen-year-old  sister. 

They were living with a distant cousin in an overcrowded house in Ikaino. 

The  cousin,  an  elderly  woman,  never  bothered  them  as  long  as  they  paid their  share  of  the  rent;  she  didn’t  come  to  church,  so  Pastor  Yoo  didn’t know her. 

“Father  and  Mother  are  starving  back  home.  Uncle  can’t  feed  his  own wife and children. At this point, I’d sell my hands if I could. God wants me to honor my parents. It’s a sin not to care for them. If I have to be disgraced

—”  The  girl  started  to  cry.  “Isn’t  it  possible  that  the  Lord  is  providing Yoshikawa-san  as  our  answer?”  She  looked  at  Pastor  Yoo,  who  took  the girl’s hands into his and bent his head as if in prayer. 

It wasn’t uncommon to hear rationalizations of this sort—the longing to transform bad deeds into good ones. No one ever wanted to hear that God didn’t work that way; the Lord would never want a young woman to trade her  body  to  follow  a  commandment.  Sins  couldn’t  be  laundered  by  good results. 

“Aigoo,” Yoo sighed. “How difficult it must be to bear the weight of this world on your small shoulders. Do your parents know where you’re getting this money?” 

“They  think  it’s  from  my  wages,  but  that  barely  covers  our  rent  and expenses.  My  brother  has  to  go  to  school;  Mother  told  me  that  it’s  my responsibility  for  him  to  finish.  He’s  threatening  to  quit  his  studies  so  he can work, but that’s a foolish decision in the long run. Then we’ll always be working  these  terrible  jobs.  Without  knowing  how  to  read  and  write Japanese.” 

Isak was astonished by her clarity; she had thought this through. He was half  a  dozen  years  older  than  she  was,  and  he  had  not  thought  of  such things. He’d never given his parents one sen of his wages, since he’d never earned money before. When he served briefly as a lay pastor at his church back home, he had gone without a salary because the church had so little for

the  senior  clergy  and  the  congregation  had  such  great  needs.  He  wasn’t certain what he would earn here. When he received the call to work at this church,  the  terms  hadn’t  been  discussed;  he’d  assumed  that  his compensation would be enough to support him—and now, his family. With money always in his pocket and more readily available when he asked his parents  or  brother,  Isak  hadn’t  bothered  to  figure  out  his  earnings  or  his expenses. In the presence of these young people, Isak felt like a selfish fool. 

“Pastor  Yoo,  we  want  you  to  decide.  She  won’t  listen  to  me.  I  cannot control where she goes after work. If she keeps meeting with that goat, he’ll do  something  terrible,  and  no  one  will  care  what  happens  to  her.  She’ll listen to you,” the brother said quietly. “She has to.” 

The  sister  kept  her  head  down.  She  did  not  want  Pastor  Yoo  to  think badly  of  her.  Sunday  mornings  were  very  special  to  her;  church  was  the only  place  she  felt  good.  She  wasn’t  doing  anything  wrong  with Yoshikawa-san,  but  she  was  certain  that  his  wife  didn’t  know  about  these meetings, and often he wanted to hold her hand, and though it didn’t seem harmful, it didn’t seem innocent, either. Not long ago, he’d mentioned that she  should  accompany  him  to  a  marvelous   onsen  in  Kyoto,  but  she  had demurred, saying she had to take care of her brother’s meals. 

“We must support our family, this is true,” Yoo prefaced, and the sister appeared visibly relieved, “but we have to be careful of your virtue—it is more  valuable  than  money.  Your  body  is  a  sacred  temple  where  the  Holy Spirit dwells. Your brother’s concern is legitimate. Apart from our faith and speaking  practically,  if  you  are  to  marry,  your  purity  and  reputation  are important, too. The world judges girls harshly for improprieties—and even accidents. It’s wrong, but it is the way this sinful world works,” Yoo said. 

“But he can’t quit school, sir. I promised Mother—” the sister said. 

“He’s young. He can go to school at a later time,” Yoo countered, though he knew this was not likely. 

At  this,  the  brother  perked  up;  he  hadn’t  expected  this  suggestion.  He hated  school—the  Japanese  teachers  thought  he  was  stupid  and  the  kids taunted him daily for his clothes and accent; the brother planned on making as much money as possible so his sister could quit or work elsewhere and so he could send money to Jeju. 

The young woman sobbed. 

Yoo  swallowed  and  said  calmly,  “You’re  right,  it’d  be  better  if  your

brother could go to school. Even for a year or two so he could know how to read  and  write.  There’s  no  better  choice  than  education,  of  course;  our country needs a new generation of educated people to lead us.” 

The  sister  quieted  down,  thinking  the  pastor  might  take  her  side.  It wasn’t that she wanted to continue seeing Yoshikawa, a silly old man who smelled  of  camphor,  but  she  believed  that  her  being  here  in  Osaka  had  a noble  purpose,  that  there  was  a  respectable  future  for  them  if  she  worked and her brother went to school. 

Isak listened to Yoo in admiration, observing that the senior pastor was an exceptional counselor, at once sympathetic and powerful. 

“Yoshikawa-san  doesn’t  want  anything  but  your  company  for  now,  but he  may  wish  for  other  things  later,  and  you’ll  find  yourself  in  his  debt. 

You’ll feel the obligation. You may fear the loss of your job. Then it may be too late. You may think you’re using him, but is that who we are? Shall we exploit because we have been exploited, my dear child?” 

Isak  nodded  in  agreement,  gratified  by  the  pastor’s  compassion  and wisdom. He wouldn’t have known what to say. 

“Isak,  would  you  bless  these  children?”  Yoo  asked,  and  Isak  began  to pray for them. 

The brother and sister left without argument and, no doubt, would return on Sunday morning to worship. 

The  sexton,  who  had  disappeared,  returned,  bringing  three  large  bowls  of wheat noodles in a black bean sauce. The three men prayed before eating. 

They sat on the floor, their legs crossed, their hot lunches on top of the low dining table that Hu had made from abandoned crates. The room was chilly, and it didn’t help that there were no floor cushions. Isak was surprised at himself for noticing this; he’d always believed that he was not the kind of person who cared about such niceties, but it was uncomfortable sitting on a concrete floor. 

“Eat, son. Hu is a fine cook. I’d go hungry without him,” Yoo said, and started to eat. 

“Will the sister stop seeing him, do you think?” Hu asked Pastor Yoo. 

“If the girl gets pregnant, Yoshikawa will throw her away, and then there

would  be  no  school  for  the  brother  anyway.  The  manager  is  just  one  of those romantic old fools who wants to be with a young girl and to feel like he’s in love. Soon he will need to lie with her, then eventually he will lose interest.  Men  and  women  are  not  very  difficult  to  understand,”  Yoo  said. 

“She  must  stop  seeing  the  manager,  and  the  brother  must  get  a  job.  She should change her workplace immediately. Together they will make enough money to live and to send to their parents.” 

Isak  was  surprised  by  the  pastor’s  change  in  tone;  he  sounded  cold, almost haughty. 

Hu nodded and ate his noodles quietly as if he were ruminating deeply about this. 

Yoo  turned  in  Isak’s  direction.  “I’ve  seen  this  many  times.  Girls  think they’ll  have  the  upper  hand  because  these  kinds  of  men  seem  so  pliable, when  in  fact,  the  girls  are  the  ones  who  end  up  paying  bitterly  for  their mistakes. The Lord forgives, but the world does not forgive.” 

“Yes,” Isak murmured. 

“How’s your wife settling in? There’s enough space at your brother’s for you two?” 

“Yes. My brother has room. My wife is expecting a baby.” 

“So fast! How wonderful,” Yoo said with pleasure. 

“That’s wonderful,” Hu said excitedly, sounding young for the first time. 

Seeing all the small children running about in the back of the sanctuary was Hu’s favorite part of attending services. Before coming to Japan, he’d lived in a large orphanage, and he liked hearing children’s voices. 

“Where does your brother live?” 

“Only  a  few  minutes  from  here.  I  understand  that  good  housing  is difficult to find.” 

Yoo laughed. “No one will rent to the Koreans. As pastor, you’ll get a chance to see how the Koreans live here. You can’t imagine: a dozen in a room that should be for two, men and families sleeping in shifts. Pigs and chickens  inside  homes.  No  running  water.  No  heat.  The  Japanese  think Koreans are filthy, but they have no choice but to live in squalor. I’ve seen aristocrats from Seoul reduced to nothing, with no money for bathhouses, wearing rags for clothing, shoeless, and unable to get work as porters in the markets.  There’s  nowhere  for  them  to  go.  Even  the  ones  with  work  and money can’t find a place to live. Some are squatting illegally.” 

“The  men  who  were  brought  here  by  Japanese  companies—wouldn’t they provide housing?” 

“There  are  camps  attached  to  mines  or  larger  factories  in  places  like Hokkaido, but the camps aren’t for families. The camps are no better; the conditions  are  deplorable,”  Yoo  said  without  emotion.  Again,  Yoo’s  tone sounded unfeeling, and it surprised Isak. When the siblings had been there, Yoo had seemed concerned about their hardship. 

“Where do you live?” Isak asked. 

“I sleep in the office. In that corner.” Yoo pointed to the area beside the stove. “And Hu sleeps in that corner.” 

“There are no pallets or bedding—” 

“They’re in the cupboard. Hu makes the beds each night and clears them up  in  the  morning.  We  could  make  room  for  you  and  your  family  if  you need to stay here. That would be part of your compensation.” 

“Thank you, sir. But I think we are all right for now.” 

Hu  nodded,  though  he  would’ve  liked  to  have  had  a  baby  living  with them; the church building was too drafty for a child. 

“And your meals?” 

“Hu fixes our meals on the stove at the back of the house. There’s a sink with running water; the outhouse is by the back. The missionaries put those in, thankfully.” 

“You don’t have a family?” Isak asked Yoo. 

“My wife passed away two years after we arrived. That was fifteen years ago. We never had children.” Yoo added, “But Hu is a son to me. He is my blessing, and now you’ve arrived to bless us both.” 

Hu blushed, pleased by this mention.

Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

“How are you with money?” Yoo asked. 

“I meant to speak with you,” Isak said, wondering if he should discuss this in front of Hu, but realizing that Hu had to be present to function as the pastor’s eyes. 

Yoo lifted his head and spoke firmly, like a hard-nosed merchant:

“Your wages will be fifteen yen per month. It isn’t enough for one man to live on. Hu and I don’t take a salary. Just living expenses. Also, I can’t guarantee  fifteen  yen  per  month,  either.  The  Canadian  churches  send  us some support, but it’s not steady, and our congregation doesn’t give much. 

Will you be all right?” 

Isak didn’t know what to say. He’d no idea what his contribution was to be  for  living  at  his  brother’s.  He  couldn’t  imagine  asking  his  brother  to support him and his wife and child. 

“Can your family help?” It had been part of Yoo’s calculation in hiring Isak. The boy’s family owned land in Pyongyang; his references there had mentioned that the family had money, so Isak’s salary would likely not be so important. They told him that he hadn’t even asked for a salary when he served as a lay pastor. Isak was sickly and not a strong hire. Yoo had been counting on Isak’s family’s financial support for the church. 

“I…I cannot ask my brother for help, sir.” 

“Oh? Is that so?” 

“And my parents cannot help at this time.” 

“I see.” 

Hu  felt  sorry  for  the  young  pastor,  who  looked  both  stunned  and ashamed. 

“Our parents have been selling their land in large parcels to pay taxes, and things are precarious now. My brother has been sending them money so they  could  get  by.  I  think  he  may  also  be  supporting  my  sister-in-law’s family.” 

Yoo  nodded.  This  had  not  been  expected,  though  it  made  sense,  of course.  Isak’s  family  was  no  different  from  the  others  who  had  been assessed  egregiously  by  the  colonial  government.  He’d  been  counting  on Isak’s  being  able  to  sustain  himself.  With  his  vision  so  heavily  impaired, Yoo  needed  a  bilingual  pastor  to  help  him  to  write  sermons  as  well  as  to deal with administrative matters with the local officials. 

“There isn’t enough from the offerings, I suppose…” Isak said. 

“No.” Yoo shook his head vigorously. There were seventy-five to eighty regular attendees on Sunday mornings, but it was really five or six of the better-off congregants who made up the lion’s share of the giving. The rest could hardly afford two shabby meals a day. 

Hu picked up the empty bowls from the table. 

“The Lord has always provided for us, sir,” Hu said. 

“Yes,  my  son,  you’ve  spoken  well.”  Yoo  smiled  at  the  young  man, wishing  he  could’ve  provided  him  with  an  education.  The  boy  had  such natural  intelligence  and  tremendous  aptitude;  he  would  have  made  a  fine scholar, even a pastor. 

“We  will  find  a  way,”  Yoo  said.  “This  must  be  very  disappointing  to you.” His tone of voice sounded the way he had spoken to the sister earlier. 

“I’m grateful for this job, sir. I’ll speak with my family about the salary. 

Hu is right, of course; the Lord will provide,” Isak said. 

“All  I  have  needed  Thy  hand  hath  provided;  Great  is  Thy  faithfulness, Lord,  unto  me!”  Pastor  Yoo  sang  in  his  rich  tenor  voice.  “The  Lord provided  you  for  our  church.  Surely,  He  will  care  for  all  of  our  material needs.” 

15

The summer had come fast. The Osaka sun felt hotter than the sun back home,  and  the  brutal  humidity  slowed  down  Sunja’s  heavy  movements. 

However,  her  workdays  were  easy,  and  until  the  baby  came,  she  and Kyunghee had to care only for themselves and their husbands, who didn’t come home until late in the evening. Isak spent long days and nights at the church  serving  the  needs  of  a  growing  congregation,  and  Yoseb  managed the  biscuit  factory  during  the  day  and  repaired  machines  in  factories  in Ikaino in the evenings for extra money. The daily tasks of cooking, laundry, and  cleaning  for  four  were  considerably  less  onerous  than  caring  for  a boardinghouse.  Sunja’s  life  felt  luxurious  in  contrast  to  her  old  life  in Busan. 

She  loved  spending  the  day  with  Kyunghee,  whom  she  called  Sister. 

After two brief months, they found themselves enjoying a close friendship

—an unexpected gift for two women who’d neither expected nor asked for much happiness. Kyunghee was no longer alone in the house all day, and Yoseb was grateful that Isak had brought the boardinghouse daughter as his wife. 

In  the  minds  of  Yoseb  and  Kyunghee,  the  cause  of  Sunja’s  pregnancy had  long  been  settled  with  a  rationalization  of  their  making:  The  girl  had been harmed through no fault of her own, and Isak had rescued her because it was his nature to make sacrifices. No one asked her the particulars, and Sunja did not speak of the matter. 

Kyunghee  and  Yoseb  hadn’t  been  able  to  have  children,  but  Kyunghee was  undeterred.  Sarah  in  the  Bible  had  a  child  in  old  age,  and  Kyunghee didn’t believe that God had forgotten her. A devout woman, she spent her time  helping  the  poor  mothers  at  the  church.  She  was  also  a  thrifty

housewife, able to save every extra sen that her husband entrusted to her. It had been Kyunghee’s idea to buy the Ikaino house with the money Yoseb’s father had given him combined with her dowry, even when Yoseb had had his doubts. “Why would we pay rent to the landlord and have nothing left when the month is over?” she’d said. Because Kyunghee stuck to a careful budget, they’d been able to send money to Yoseb’s parents and her own—

both families having lost all of their arable land. 

Kyunghee’s  dream  was  to  own  her  own  business  selling  kimchi  and pickles  at  the  covered  market  near  Tsuruhashi  Station,  and  when  Sunja moved  in,  she  finally  had  a  person  who’d  listen  to  her  plans.  Yoseb disapproved of her working for money. He liked coming home to a rested and pretty housewife who had his supper ready—an ideal reason for a man to  work  hard,  he  believed.  Each  day,  Kyunghee  and  Sunja  made  three meals: a hot, traditional breakfast with soup; a packed lunch for the men to take to work; and a hot dinner. Without refrigeration or the cold Pyongyang climate, Kyunghee had to cook often to avoid waste. 

It was unusually warm for the beginning of summer, and the thought of making soup on the stone stove at the back of the house would have been unappealing  to  any  normal  housewife,  but  Kyunghee  didn’t  mind.  She enjoyed going to the market and thinking about what to fix for their meals. 

Unlike most of the Korean women in Ikaino, she spoke decent Japanese and was able to negotiate with the merchants for what she wanted. 

When Kyunghee and Sunja entered the butcher shop, Tanaka-san, the tall young proprietor, snapped to attention and shouted “Irasshai!” to welcome them. 

The butcher and his helper, Koji, were delighted to see the pretty Korean and  her  pregnant  sister-in-law.  They  weren’t  big  customers;  in  fact,  they spent  very  little  money,  but  they  were  steady,  and  as  Tanaka’s  father  and grandfather had taught him—the eighth generation of sons to run the shop

—the daily, cumulative payments were more valuable than the infrequent, outsize purchases. Housewives were the backbone of the business, and the Korean  women  couldn’t  fuss  like  the  local  women,  which  made  them preferable customers. It was also rumored that one of his great-grandfathers may have been Korean or  burakumin, so the young butcher had been raised by his father and mother to be fair to all the customers. Times might have changed,  to  be  sure,  but  butchery,  which  required  touching  dead  animals, 

was  still  a  shameful  occupation—the  chief  reason  given  as  to  why  the matchmaker  had  such  difficulty  arranging  an   omiai  for  him—and  Tanaka couldn’t help but feel a kind of kinship with foreigners. 

The  men  ogled  Kyunghee,  altogether  ignoring  Sunja,  who  had  by  now grown used to this invisibility whenever the two went anywhere. Kyunghee, who looked smart in her midi skirts and crisp white blouses, easily passing for a schoolteacher or a merchant’s modest wife with her fine features, was welcomed  in  most  places.  Everyone  thought  she  was  Japanese  until  she spoke; even then, the local men were pleasant to her. For the first time in her  life,  Sunja  felt  aware  of  her  unacceptable  plainness  and  inappropriate attire. She felt homely in Osaka. Her well-worn, traditional clothes were an inevitable  badge  of  difference,  and  though  there  were  enough  older  and poorer  Koreans  in  the  neighborhood  who  wore  them  still,  she  had  never been  looked  upon  with  scorn  with  such  regularity,  when  she  had  never meant  to  call  attention  to  herself.  Within  the  settled  boundaries  of  Ikaino, one  would  not  be  stared  at  for  wearing  a  white   hanbok,  but  outside  the neighborhood  and  farther  out  from  the  train  station,  the  chill  against identifiable  Koreans  was  obvious.  Sunja  would  have  preferred  to  wear Western clothes or  mompei, but it would make no sense to spend money on fabric to sew new things now. Kyunghee promised to make her new clothes after the baby was delivered. 

Kyunghee bowed politely to the men, and Sunja retreated into the corner of the shop. 

“How can we help you today, Boku-san?” Tanaka-san asked. 

Even  after  two  months,  it  still  surprised  Sunja  to  hear  her  husband’s family  name  pronounced  in  its  Japanese  form.  Due  to  the  colonial government’s requirements, it was normal for Koreans to have at least two or three names, but back home she’d had little use for the Japanese  tsumei

—Junko  Kaneda—written  on  her  identity  papers,  because  Sunja  didn’t  go to  school  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  official  business.  Sunja  was  born  a Kim, yet in Japan, where women went by their husband’s family name, she was Sunja Baek, which was translated into Sunja Boku, and on her identity papers, her  tsumei was now Junko Bando. When the Koreans had to choose a Japanese surname, Isak’s father had chosen Bando because it had sounded like the Korean word  ban-deh, meaning objection, making their compulsory Japanese  name  a  kind  of  joke.  Kyunghee  had  assured  her  that  all  these

names would become normal soon enough. 

“What will you be cooking today, Boku-san?” the young owner asked. 

“May  I  please  have  shinbones  and  a  bit  of  meat?  I’m  making  soup,” 

Kyunghee said in her radio announcer–style Japanese; she regularly listened to Japanese programs to improve her accent. 

“Right  away.”  Tanaka  grabbed  three  large  hunks  of  shinbone  from  the stock  of  beef  bones  and  oxtails  he  kept  in  the  ice  chest  for  Korean customers;  Japanese  did  not  have  any  use  for  bones.  He  wrapped  up  a handful of stew meat. “Will that be all?” 

She nodded. 

“Thirty-six sen, please.” 

Kyunghee opened her coin purse. Two yen and sixty sen had to last her for eight more days until Yoseb gave her his pay envelope. 

“Sumimasen desu, how much would it be for just the bones?” 

“Ten sen.” 

“Please pardon my error. Today, I’ll take only the bones. Meat another time, I promise.” 

“Of course.” Tanaka returned the meat to the case. It wasn’t the first time a customer didn’t have enough money to pay for food, but unlike his other customers,  the  Koreans  didn’t  ask  him  for  credit,  not  that  he  would  have agreed to it. 

“You’re  making  a  broth?”  Tanaka  wondered  what  it  might  be  like  to have such an elegant wife worrying about his meals and being thrifty with her  pin  money.  He  was  the  first  son,  and  although  he  was  eager  to  be married, he lived with his mother as a bachelor. “What kind?” 

“Seolleongtang.”  She  looked  at  him  quizzically,  wondering  if  he  knew what that was. 

“And how do you make this soup?” Tanaka folded his arms leisurely and leaned into the counter, looking carefully into Kyunghee’s lovely face. She had beautiful, even teeth, he thought. 

“First, you wash the bones very carefully in cold water. Then you boil the bones and throw that first batch of water out because it will have all the blood and dirt that you don’t want in your broth. Then you boil it again with clean,  cold  water,  then  simmer  it  for  a  long,  long  time  until  the  broth  is white  like  tofu,  then  you  add  daikon,  chopped  scallions,  and  salt.  It’s delicious and very good for your health.” 

“It would be better to have some meat with it, I would imagine.” 

“And  white  rice  and  noodles!  Why  not?”  Kyunghee  laughed,  her  hand raised reflexively to cover her teeth. 

Both men laughed with pleasure, understanding her joke, since rice was costly even for them. 

“And  do  you  eat  kimchi  with  that?”  Tanaka  asked,  never  having  had such a long conversation with Kyunghee. It felt safe for him to talk with her with  his  assistant  and  her  sister-in-law  present.  “Kimchi  is  a  bit  spicy  for me, yet I think it’s nice with grilled chicken or grilled pork.” 

“Kimchi  is  delicious  with  every  meal.  I  will  bring  you  some  from  our house next time.” 

Tanaka reopened the paper packet of bones and put back half of the meat he’d just returned to the case. 

“It’s not much. Just enough for the baby.” Tanaka smiled at Sunja, who was surprised that the butcher had noticed her. “A mother must eat well if she’s to raise a strong worker for the Emperor.” 

“I couldn’t take anything for free,” Kyunghee said, perplexed. She didn’t know  what  he  was  doing  exactly,  but  she  really  couldn’t  afford  the  meat today. 

Sunja was confused by their conversation. They were saying something about kimchi. 

“This  is  the  first  sale  of  the  day.  Sharing  will  bring  me  luck,”  Tanaka said, feeling puffed up like any man who could give something worthwhile to an attractive woman whenever he pleased. 

Kyunghee placed the ten sen on the spotless money dish resting on the counter, smiled, and bowed to both men before she left. 

Outside the shop, Sunja asked what happened. 

“He didn’t charge us for the meat. I didn’t know how to make him take it back.” 

“He likes you. It was a present.” Sunja giggled, feeling like Dokhee, the younger servant girl back home, who’d joke about men whenever she had the  chance.  Though  she  thought  of  her  mother  often,  it  had  been  a  while since she’d thought about the sisters back home. “I’ll call Tanaka-san your

boyfriend from now on.” 

Kyunghee swatted playfully at Sunja, shaking her head. 

“He said it’s for your baby, so he can grow up to be a good worker for the country.” Kyunghee made a face. “And Tanaka-san knows I’m Korean.” 

“Since  when  do  men  care  about  such  things?  Mrs.  Kim  next  door  told me about the quiet lady who lives at the end of the road who’s Japanese and married to the Korean who brews alcohol in his house. Their kids are half Japanese!”  This  had  shocked  Sunja  when  she’d  first  heard  of  it,  though everything  Mrs.  Kim,  the  lady  who  raised  pigs,  told  her  was  shocking. 

Yoseb didn’t want Kyunghee and Sunja to speak with Mrs. Kim, who also didn’t  go  to  church  on  Sundays.  They  weren’t  allowed  to  speak  to  the Japanese wife, either, because her husband was routinely sent to jail for his bootlegging. 

“If you run away with the nice butcher, I’ll miss you,” Sunja said. 

“Even if I weren’t married, I would not choose that man. He smiles too much.” Kyunghee winked at her. “I like my cranky husband who’s always telling me what to do and worries about everything. 

“Come on, we have to buy vegetables now. That’s why I didn’t buy the meat. We should try to find some potatoes to roast. Wouldn’t that be good for our lunch?” 

“Sister—” 

“Yes?” Kyunghee said. 

“We’re  not  contributing  to  the  house.  The  groceries,  fuel,  sento fees—

I’ve never seen such prices in my life. Back home, we had a garden, and we never  paid  for  vegetables.  And  the  price  of  fish!  My  mother  would  never eat  it  again  if  she  knew  the  cost.  Back  home,  we  scrimped,  but  I  didn’t realize how easy we had it—we got free fish from the guests, and here, an apple costs more than beef ribs in Busan. Mother was careful with money, the  way  you  are,  but  even  she  couldn’t  have  made  the  kinds  of  delicious things you make on a budget. Isak and I think you should take the money he makes to help with the food budget at least.” 

The fact that Sister and Brother wouldn’t allow Isak and her to pay for a single thing was difficult to accept, and it wasn’t as if they could afford to rent a place separately. Besides, even if they could have afforded to do so, it would have hurt Sister’s feelings deeply for Isak and Sunja to move out. 

“I’m  sure  you  ate  much  better  and  more  filling  things  back  home,” 

Kyunghee said, appearing sad. 

“No, no. That’s not what I meant. We just feel terrible that you won’t let us contribute to the enormous expenses.” 

“Yoseb and I won’t allow it. You should be saving money for the baby. 

We’ll have to get clothes for him and diapers, and one day he’ll go to school and become a gentleman. Won’t that be something? I hope he’ll like school like his father and not dodge books like his uncle!” The thought of a baby living with them made Kyunghee smile. This child felt like an answer to her prayers. 

“Mother  sent  me  three  yen  in  her  last  letter.  And  we  have  money  we brought  and  Isak’s  recent  earnings  to  help.  You  shouldn’t  have  to  worry about  expenses  so  much  or  selling  kimchi  to  support  two  extra  mouths—

and soon, three,” Sunja said. 

“Sunja-ya,  you’re  being  disrespectful.  I’m  your  elder.  We  can  manage just  fine.  Also,  if  I  can’t  talk  about  my  wish  to  earn  money  without  you jumping  in  about  wanting  to  contribute,  then  I  can’t  talk  about  my  pipe dreams of becoming the kimchi  ajumma of Tsuruhashi Station.” Kyunghee laughed.  “Be  a  good  little  sister  and  let  me  dream  out  loud  about  my business where I’ll make so much money that I can buy us a castle and send your son to medical school in Tokyo.” 

“Do you think housewives would buy another woman’s kimchi?” 

“Why not! Don’t you think I make good kimchi? My family cook made the  finest  pickles  in  Pyongyang.”  Kyunghee  lifted  her  chin,  then  broke down laughing. She had a joyous laugh. “I’d make a great kimchi  ajumma. 

My pickled cabbage would be clean and delicious.” 

“Why  can’t  you  start  now?  I  have  enough  money  to  buy  cabbage  and radish. I can help you make it. If we sell a lot, it would be better for me than working  in  a  factory,  because  I  can  watch  the  baby  at  home  when  he’s born.” 

“Yes, we would be really good at it, but Yoseb would kill me. He said he’d never have his wife work. Never. And he wouldn’t want you to work, either.” 

“But I grew up working with my mother and father. He knows that. My mother served the guests and did all the cooking, and I cleaned and washed

—” 

“Yoseb is old-fashioned.” Kyunghee sighed. “I married a very good man. 

It’s my fault. If I had children, I wouldn’t feel so restless. I just don’t want to be so idle. This isn’t Yoseb’s fault. No one works harder than he does. 

Back in the olden days, a man in his situation could’ve thrown me out for not  having  a  son.”  Kyunghee  nodded  to  herself,  recalling  the  numerous stories  of  barren  women  that  she’d  heard  as  a  child,  never  having considered that such a thing could happen to her. “I’ll listen to my husband. 

He has always taken such good care of me.” 

Sunja could neither agree nor disagree, so she let the statement hang in the  air.  Her  brother-in-law,  Yoseb,  was  in  actuality  saying  that  a   yangban woman  like  Kyunghee  couldn’t  work  outside  the  house;  Sunja  was  an ordinary peasant’s daughter, so working in a market was fine for her. The distinction  didn’t  trouble  Sunja,  since  she  agreed  that  Kyunghee  was  a superior person in so many ways. Nevertheless, living with Kyunghee and speaking so truthfully with her about everything, Sunja also knew that her sister-in-law  was  heartbroken  about  what  she  could  not  have  and  might have been far happier trying her luck as a kimchi  ajumma. 

Regardless, it wasn’t her place to say. All this was what her brother-in-law  would  call  “foolish  women’s  talk.”  For  Kyunghee’s  sake,  Sunja brightened up and linked arms with her sister-in-law, who seemed to drag a little. Arm in arm, they went to buy cabbage and daikon. 

16

Kyunghee didn’t recognize the two men at her door, but they knew her name. 

The  taller  one  with  the  pointy  face  smiled  more  frequently,  but  the shorter  one  had  the  kinder  expression.  They  were  dressed  similarly  in workmen’s  clothing—dark  slacks  and  short-sleeved  shirts—but  both  wore expensive-looking  leather  shoes.  The  taller  one  spoke  with  a  distinct  Jeju accent; he dug out a folded sheet of paper from the back pocket of his pants. 

“Your  husband  signed  this,”  he  said,  flashing  her  the  formal-looking document. Part of it was written in Korean but much of it was in Japanese and  Chinese  characters.  On  the  upper  right-hand  corner,  Kyunghee recognized Yoseb’s name and  hanko. “He’s late on his payments.” 

“I don’t know anything about this. My husband’s at work now.” 

Kyunghee thought she might cry and put her hand on the door, hoping the men would leave. “Please come by later when he’s home.” 

Sunja  stood  close  by  her,  her  hands  resting  on  her  abdomen.  The  men didn’t look dangerous to Sunja. Physically, they resembled the lodgers back home, but her sister-in-law appeared flustered. 

“He’ll be home late tonight. Come back then,” Sunja repeated, but much more loudly than Kyunghee had. 

“You’re  the  sister-in-law,  right?”  the  shorter  one  said  to  her.  He  had dimples when he smiled. 

Sunja  said  nothing,  trying  not  to  appear  surprised  by  the  fact  that  he knew who she was. 

The taller one continued grinning at Kyunghee. His teeth were large and square and rooted in pale pink gums. 

“We’ve already spoken to your husband, but he hasn’t been responsive

so  we  thought  we’d  drop  by  and  visit  with  you.”  He  paused  and  said  her name  slowly:  “Baek  Kyunghee—I  had  a  cousin  named  Kyunghee.  Your tsumei is Bando Kimiko,  nee?” The man placed his wide hand on the door and  pressed  it  in  slightly  toward  her.  He  glanced  at  Sunja.  “The  fact  that we’re  meeting  your  sister-in-law  just  doubles  our  pleasure.  Right?”  The men laughed heartily together. 

Again,  Kyunghee  attempted  to  scan  the  document  held  before  her.  “I don’t understand it,” she said finally. 

“This is the important part: Baek Yoseb owes my boss a hundred twenty yen.”  He  pointed  to  the  number  120  written  in  kanji  in  the  second paragraph. “Your husband has missed the last two payments. We’re hoping that you’ll get him to make them today.” 

“How much are the payments?” Kyunghee asked. 

“Eight yen plus interest per week,” the shorter man said; he had a strong accent  from  the  Kyungsangdo  region.  “Maybe  you  keep  some  money  at home and can pay us?” he asked. “It comes out to about twenty yen.” 

Yoseb  had  just  given  her  the  food  money  for  the  next  two  weeks.  She had six yen in her purse. If she gave that to him, they’d have no money for food. 

“Is  a  hundred  twenty  yen  the  whole  amount?”  Sunja  asked.  The  paper didn’t make any sense to her, either. 

The short man looked a little worried and shook his head. 

“By  now,  it’s  almost  double  if  you  include  the  interest.  Why?  Do  you have the money?” 

“As  of  today,  the  total  would  be  two  hundred  thirteen  yen,”  the  taller man said. He’d always been good at doing sums in his head. 

“Uh-muh,”  Kyunghee  exclaimed.  She  closed  her  eyes  and  leaned  her body against the doorframe. 

Sunja stepped forward and said calmly, “We’ll get you the money.” She spoke to them the same way she would’ve spoken to Fatso, the lodger, as to when he could expect his wash to be ready. She didn’t even glance in their direction. “Just come back in three hours. Before it gets dark.” 

“We’ll see you later,” the taller one said. 

The  sisters-in-law  walked  briskly  toward  the  shopping  street  near Tsuruhashi Station. They didn’t linger in front of the fabric shop window or pause  at  the   senbei  stall;  they  didn’t  greet  the  friendly  vegetable  sellers. 

Rather, their bodies moved in unison toward their destination. 

“I don’t want you to do this,” Kyunghee said. 

“Father  told  me  about  people  like  this.  If  the  entire  debt  isn’t  paid  off immediately, the interest gets higher and higher, and you’ll never be able to pay it all back. Father said that you always end up owing a great deal more than  you  borrow.  Think  about  it—how  did  a  hundred  twenty  yen  become two hundred thirteen?” 

Hoonie  Kim  had  witnessed  his  neighbors  lose  everything  after borrowing a small amount of money to buy seedlings or equipment; when the  moneylenders  were  through  with  them,  his  neighbors  would  end  up giving them all their crops on top of their initial loans. Sunja’s father had loathed moneylenders and had warned her often about the dangers of debt. 

“If  I’d  known,  I  would’ve  stopped  sending  money  to  our  parents,” 

Kyunghee mumbled to herself. 

Sunja  looked  straight  ahead,  avoiding  eye  contact  with  anyone  on  the busy street who glanced in their direction. She was trying to figure out what she’d say to the broker. 

“Sister,  you  saw  his  sign  in  Korean,  right?”  Sunja  said.  “That  would make him Korean, right?” 

“I’m not sure. I don’t know anyone who’s ever been there.” 

Following  the  Korean  signs  posted  on  the  facade  of  the  low  brick building,  the  women  climbed  up  the  wide  stairs  to  the  second  floor.  The pawnbroker’s  office  door  had  a  curtained  window,  and  Sunja  opened  it gingerly. 

It was a warm, breezeless day in June, but the older man behind the desk wore a green silk ascot tucked into his white dress shirt and a brown woolen vest.  The  three  square  windows  facing  the  street  were  open,  and  two electric  fans  whirred  quietly  in  the  opposite  corners  of  the  office.  Two younger men with similar chubby faces played cards by the middle window. 

They glanced up and smiled at the two women. 

“Welcome.  How  can  I  be  of  service?”  the  pawnbroker  asked  them  in Korean.  His  hometown  accent  was  hard  to  place.  “Would  you  like  to  sit down?” He motioned to the chairs, and Sunja told him she’d prefer to stand. 

Kyunghee stood next to Sunja and refused to look at the men. 

Sunja opened the palm of her hand to show him the pocket watch. 

“Ajeossi, how much could you give us for this?” 

The man raised his gray-black eyebrows and pulled out a loupe from his desk drawer. 

“Where did you get this?” 

“My mother gave it to me. It’s solid silver and washed in gold,” Sunja said. 

“She knows you’re selling it?” 

“She gave it to me to sell. For the baby.” 

“Wouldn’t you prefer a loan for the watch? Maybe you don’t want to let go of it,” he asked. Loans were rarely repaid, and he’d be able to keep the collateral. 

Sunja spoke slowly: “I want to sell it. If you don’t wish to buy it, I won’t trouble you any longer.” 

The broker smiled, wondering if the pregnant girl had already been to his competitors. There were three pawnbrokers just a few streets away. None of the others were Korean, but if she spoke any Japanese, it would have been easy  to  sell  the  watch.  The  pretty  woman  who  accompanied  the  pregnant one before him looked a little Japanese in the way she dressed; it was hard to  tell.  It  was  possible  that  the  pretty  one  had  brought  the  pregnant  girl along to negotiate with him and that the watch belonged to her. 

“If you have a need to sell it,” the broker said, “I always take pleasure helping a person from home.” 

Sunja said nothing. In the market, say very little, her father had taught her. 

Kyunghee marveled at her sister-in-law appearing calmer than she’d ever seen her. 

The pawnbroker examined the watch with care, opening its silver casing to  study  the  mechanical  workings  visible  through  its  open  crystal  back.  It was  an  extraordinary  pocket  watch,  and  impossible  to  believe  that  this pregnant woman’s mother could have owned such a thing. The watch was maybe  a  year  old  if  that  and  without  a  scratch.  He  turned  it  faceup  again and laid it on the green leather blotter on his desk. 

“Young men prefer wristwatches these days. I’m not even sure if I can sell this.” 

Sunja noticed that the broker had blinked hard after saying this, but he hadn’t blinked once when he was talking to her before. 

“Thank you for looking at it,” Sunja said, and turned around. Kyunghee was trying not to appear worried. Sunja picked up the watch and gathered the  tail  end  of  her  long   chima,  preparing  to  walk  out  of  the  office.  “We appreciate your time. Thank you.” 

“I’d like to help you,” the broker said, raising his voice slightly. 

Sunja turned around. 

“If you need the money right away, perhaps it would be easier for you to sell it here than walking around in this hot day in your condition. I can help you. It looks like you’ll have the child soon. I hope it’s a boy who’ll take good care of his mother,” he said. 

“Fifty yen,” he said. 

“Two hundred,” she said. “It’s worth at least three hundred. It’s made in Switzerland and brand-new.” 

The two men by the window put down their cards and got up from their seats. They’d never seen a girl talk like this. 

“If you think it’s worth so much, then why don’t you sell it for a higher price elsewhere,” the broker snapped, irritated by her insolence. He couldn’t stand women who talked back. 

Sunja  bit  her  inner  lower  lip.  If  she  sold  it  to  a  Japanese  pawnbroker, Sunja  feared  that  the  broker  may  alert  the  police  about  the  watch.  Hansu had told her that the police were involved in nearly all the businesses here. 

“Thank you. I won’t waste any more of your time,” Sunja said. 

The pawnbroker chuckled. 

Kyunghee suddenly felt confident of her sister-in-law, who had been so helpless  upon  her  arrival  in  Osaka  that  she  had  to  carry  her  name  and address written in Japanese on a card in case she got lost. 

“What  did  your  mother  do  back  home?”  the  pawnbroker  asked.  “You sound like you’re from Busan.” 

Sunja paused, wondering if she had to answer the question. 

“Did she work in the markets there?” 

“She’s a boardinghouse keeper.” 

“She must be a clever businesswoman,” he said. The broker had figured that  her  mother  must  have  been  a  whore  or  a  merchant  of  some  sort  who collaborated  with  the  Japanese  government.  The  watch  could  also  have

been  stolen.  From  her  speech  and  dress,  the  pregnant  girl  was  not  from  a wealthy family. “Young lady, you’re sure that your mother gave this to you to sell. You are aware that I will need your name and address in case there’s any trouble.” 

Sunja nodded. 

“Okay, then. A hundred twenty-five yen.” 

“Two hundred.” Sunja didn’t know if she’d get this amount, but she felt certain that the broker was greedy, and if he was willing to go to 125 from fifty, then surely the Japanese brokers would think it was valuable, too. 

The broker burst out laughing. The young men were now standing by the desk,  and  they  laughed  as  well.  The  younger  one  said,  “You  should  work here.” 

The broker folded his arms close to his chest. He wanted the watch; he knew exactly who would buy it. 

“Father, you should give the little mother her price. If only because she’s so persistent!” the young one said, knowing his father didn’t like to lose a bargain  and  would  need  some  coaxing.  He  felt  sorry  for  the  girl  with  the puffy face. She wasn’t the usual kind of girl who came up here to sell gold rings whenever she was in trouble. 

“Does your husband know you’re here?” the pawnbroker’s younger son asked. 

“Yes,” Sunja replied. 

“Is  he  a  drinker  or  a  gambler?”  The  son  had  seen  desperate  women before, and the stories were always the same. 

“Neither,” she said in a stern voice, as if to warn him not to ask any more questions. 

“A hundred seventy-five yen,” the broker said. 

“Two hundred.” Sunja could feel the warm, smooth metal in her palm; Hansu would have held firm to his price. 

The broker protested, “How do I know that I can sell it?” 

“Father,” the older son said, smiling. “You’d be helping a little mother from home.” 

The broker’s desk was made of an unfamiliar wood—a rich dark brown color with teardrop-shaped whorls the size of a child’s hand. She counted three  teardrop  whorls  on  the  surface.  When  she’d  gone  to  collect mushrooms  with  Hansu,  there  had  been  innumerable  types  of  trees.  The

musty smell of wet leaves on the forest carpet, the baskets filled to bursting with mushrooms, the sharp pain of lying with him—these memories would not leave her. She had to be rid of him, to stop this endless recollection of the one person she wished to forget. 

Sunja took a deep breath. Kyunghee was wringing her hands. 

“We  understand  if  you  don’t  wish  to  buy  this,”  Sunja  said  quietly,  and turned to leave. 

The pawnbroker held up his hand, signaling her to wait, and went to the back room, where he kept his cashbox. 

When  the  two  men  returned  to  the  house  for  the  payments,  the  women stood by the door and didn’t invite them inside. 

“If I pay you the money, how do I know that the debt is totally gone?” 

Sunja asked the taller one. 

“We’ll get the boss to sign the promissory note to say it’s canceled,” he said. “How do I know that you have the money?” 

“Can your boss come here?” Sunja asked. 

“You must be crazy,” the taller one said, in shock at her request. 

Sunja sensed that she shouldn’t give these men the money. She tried to close  the  door  a  little  so  she  could  speak  with  Kyunghee,  but  the  man pushed it back with his foot. 

“Listen, if you really have the money, you can come with us. We’ll take you right now.” 

“Where?” Kyunghee spoke up, her voice tremulous. 

“By the sake shop. It’s not far.” 

The  boss  was  an  earnest-looking  young  Korean,  not  much  older  than Kyunghee. He looked like a doctor or a teacher—well-worn suit, gold-wire spectacles,  combed-back  black  hair,  and  a  thoughtful  expression.  No  one would have thought he was a moneylender. His office was about the size of the pawnbroker’s, and on the wall opposite the front door, a shelf was lined with  books  in  Japanese  and  Korean.  Electric  lamps  were  lit  next  to comfortable-looking  chairs.  A  boy  brought  the  women  hot   genmaicha  in

pottery cups. Kyunghee understood why her husband would borrow money from a man like this. 

When Kyunghee handed him all the money, the moneylender said thank you and canceled the note, placing his red seal on the paper. 

“If  there’s  anything  else  I  can  ever  do  for  you,  please  let  me  be  of service,” he said, looking at Kyunghee. “We must support each other while we’re far from home. I am your servant.” 

“When, when did my husband borrow this money?” Kyunghee asked the moneylender. 

“He asked me in February. We’re friends, so of course, I obliged.” 

The women nodded, understanding. Yoseb had borrowed the money for Isak and Sunja’s passage. 

“Thank you, sir. We shall not bother you again,” Kyunghee said. 

“Your husband will be very pleased to have the matter settled,” he said, wondering how the women had raised the money so quickly. 

The women said nothing and returned home to make dinner. 

17

Where did you get the money?” Yoseb shouted, clutching the canceled promissory note. 

“Sunja sold the watch her mother gave her,” Kyunghee replied. 

Invariably, each night on their street, someone was yelling or a child was crying, but loud noises had never come from their house. Yoseb, who didn’t anger  easily,  was  enraged.  Sunja  stood  wedged  in  the  back  corner  of  the front  room,  her  head  lowered—mute  as  a  rock.  Tears  streamed  down  her reddened cheeks. Isak wasn’t home yet from church. 

“You had a pocket watch worth over two hundred yen? Does Isak know about this?” he shouted at Sunja. 

Kyunghee raised her hands and put herself between him and Sunja. 

“Her mother gave her the watch. To sell for the baby.” 

Sunja  slid  down  the  wall,  no  longer  able  to  stand.  Sharp  pains  pierced her  pelvis  and  back.  She  shut  her  eyes  and  covered  her  head  with  her forearms. 

“Where did you sell this watch?” 

“At the pawnbroker by the vegetable stand,” Kyunghee said. 

“Are you out of your mind? What kind of women go to pawnbrokers?” 

Yoseb stared hard at Sunja. “How can a woman do such a thing?” 

From  the  floor,  Sunja  looked  up  at  him  and  pleaded,  “It’s  not  Sister’s fault—” 

“And did you ask your husband if you could go to a pawnbroker?” 

“Why  are  you  getting  so  upset?  She  was  just  trying  to  help  us.  She’s pregnant. Leave her alone.” Kyunghee averted her eyes, trying to keep from talking  back  to  him.  He  knew  full  well  that  Sunja  hadn’t  spoken  to  Isak. 

Why  did  Yoseb  have  to  pay  for  everything?  Why  did  he  control  all  the

money? The last time they’d argued was when she’d wanted to get a factory job. 

“Sunja was worried about us. I’m sorry that she had to sell that beautiful watch.  Try  to  understand,  yobo.”  Kyunghee  laid  her  hand  gently  on  his forearm. 

“Stupid women! Every time I walk down the street, how am I supposed to face these men again, knowing that some foolish women paid my debts? 

My nuts are shriveling.” 

Yoseb  had  never  spoken  in  such  a  vulgar  way  before,  and  Kyunghee understood that he was insulting Sunja. He was calling Sunja stupid, Sunja foolish;  Kyunghee  was  also  being  blamed  because  she’d  allowed  it  to happen.  But  it  was  smarter  for  them  to  pay  off  this  debt;  if  she’d  been allowed to get a job before, they would’ve had savings. 

Sunja  couldn’t  stop  crying.  The  agonizing  pains  around  her  lower abdomen had returned with greater force, and she didn’t know what to say. 

It wasn’t clear what was happening to her body. 

“Yobo, please, please understand,” Kyunghee said. 

Yoseb  said  nothing.  Sunja’s  legs  were  splayed  out  like  a  drunk  on  the street with her swollen hands holding up her enormous belly. He wondered if he should’ve let her into his house. How could a gold pocket watch have come from her mother? It had been years, but he’d met both her mother and her  father.  Hoonie  Kim  was  the  crippled  son  of  two  peasants  who’d operated a boardinghouse on a minuscule rented plot. Where would his wife have gotten such a valuable thing? Their lodgers were mainly fishermen or men who worked at the fish market. He could’ve accepted that the girl had been given a few gold rings worth thirty or forty yen by her mother. Perhaps a jade ring worth ten. Had she stolen the watch? he wondered. Could Isak have  married  a  thief  or  a  whore?  He  couldn’t  bring  himself  to  say  these things, so Yoseb opened the corrugated metal door and left. 

When he came home, Isak was alarmed at the sight of the sobbing women. 

He tried to calm them so they could speak more coherently. He listened to their broken explanations. 

“So where did he go?” Isak asked. 

“I don’t know. He doesn’t go out normally. I didn’t realize he’d be this

—” Kyunghee stopped, not wanting to upset Sunja any further. 

“He’ll be all right,” Isak said, and turned to Sunja. 

“I didn’t know you had such a valuable thing from home. It’s from your mother?” Isak asked tentatively. 

Sunja was still crying, and Kyunghee nodded in her place. 

“Oh?” Isak looked again at Sunja. 

“Where did your mother get this, Sunja?” Isak asked. 

“I didn’t ask. Perhaps someone owed her money.” 

“I see.” Isak nodded, not sure what to make of this. 

Kyunghee  stroked  Sunja’s  feverish  head.  “Will  you  explain  this  to Yoseb?”  she  asked  her  brother-in-law.  “You  understand  why  we  did  this, right?” 

“Yes, of course. Brother borrowed the money to help me. Sunja sold the watch to pay that debt, so in fact she sold it to help us get here. The passage here was expensive, and how was he to raise all that money so quickly? I should’ve thought it through. I was naïve and childish, as usual, and Brother was just taking care of me. It’s unfortunate that Sunja had to sell the watch, but it’s right for us to pay our debts. I’ll say all this to him, Sister. Please don’t worry,” he said to the women. 

Kyunghee nodded, feeling a little better finally. 

A  spasm  flared  through  Sunja’s  side,  knocking  her  back  almost.  “Uh-muh.  Uh-muh!” 

“Is it? Is it—?” 

Warm water rushed down Sunja’s leg. 

“Should I get the midwife?” Isak asked. 

“Sister  Okja—three  houses  down  on  our  side  of  the  street,”  Kyunghee said, and Isak ran out of the house. 

“It’s  okay,  it’s  okay,”  Kyunghee  cooed,  holding  Sunja’s  hand.  “You’re doing mother’s work. Women suffer, don’t they? Oh, my dear Sunja. I’m so sorry you’re in pain.” Kyunghee prayed over her, “Lord, dear Lord, please have mercy—” 

Sunja took a fistful of her skirt material and put it in her mouth to keep from screaming. It felt as if she was being stabbed repeatedly. She bit down hard on the coarse fabric. “Umma,  umma,” she cried out. 

  

Sister  Okja,  the  midwife,  was  a  fifty-year-old  Korean  from  Jeju  who’d delivered most of the children in the ghetto. Well trained by her aunt, Okja had kept her own children housed and fed through midwifery, nursing, and babysitting.  Her  husband,  the  father  of  their  six  children,  was  as  good  as dead to her, though he was alive and living in her house several days a week in a drunken stupor. When she wasn’t delivering babies, Okja minded the children  of  the  neighborhood  women  who  worked  in  the  factories  and markets. 

This delivery was no trouble at all. The boy was long and well shaped, and the labor, as terrifying as it might have been for the new mother, was brief, and thankfully for the midwife, the baby didn’t arrive in the middle of the night but only in time to interrupt her making dinner. Sister Okja hoped her  daughter-in-law,  who  lived  with  them,  hadn’t  burned  the  barley  rice again. 

“Hush, hush. You did well,” Okja said to the girl who was still crying for her mother. “The boy’s very strong and nice looking. Look at all that black hair!  You  should  rest  a  little  now.  The  child  will  need  to  feed  soon,”  she said, before getting up to leave. 

“Damn  these  knees.”  Okja  rubbed  her  kneecaps  and  shins  and  got  up leisurely,  making  sure  that  the  family  had  enough  time  to  find  her  some money. 

Kyunghee got her purse and gave Sister Okja three yen. 

Okja was unimpressed. “If you have any questions, just get me.” 

Kyunghee  thanked  her;  she  felt  like  a  mother  herself.  The  child  was beautiful.  Her  heart  ached  at  the  sight  of  his  small  face—the  shock  of  jet hair  and  his  blue-black  eyes.  She  was  reminded  of  the  Bible  character Samson. 

After Kyunghee bathed the child in the dinged-up basin normally used to salt cabbage, she handed the baby, wrapped in a clean towel, to Isak. 

“You’re a father,” Kyunghee said, smiling. “He’s handsome, isn’t he?” 

Isak nodded, feeling more pleased than he’d imagined he’d be. 

“Uh-muh,  I  have  to  make  soup  for  Sunja.  She  has  to  have  soup  right away.”  Kyunghee  went  to  check  on  Sunja,  who  was  already  fast  asleep, leaving Isak with the child in the front room. In the kitchen, as Kyunghee

soaked the dried seaweed in cold water, she prayed that her husband would come home soon. 

In  the  morning,  the  house  felt  different.  Kyunghee  hadn’t  slept.  Yoseb hadn’t come home the night before. Isak had tried to stay awake, too, but she’d  made  him  go  to  sleep,  because  he  had  to  give  a  sermon  the  next morning and work at church the whole Sunday. Sunja slept so soundly that she snored and had only gotten up to feed; the child latched on her breast well  and  fussed  very  little.  Kyunghee  had  cleaned  the  kitchen,  prepared breakfast, and sewed shirts for the baby while waiting for Yoseb. Every few minutes, she glanced at the window. 

While  Isak  was  finishing  his  breakfast,  Yoseb  came  in  the  house smelling of cigarettes. His eyeglasses were smudged and his face stubbly. 

As soon as Kyunghee saw him, she went to the kitchen to get his breakfast. 

“Brother.” Isak got up. “Are you all right?” 

Yoseb nodded. 

“The baby was born. It’s a boy,” Isak said, smiling. 

Yoseb sat down on the floor by the low acacia dining table—one of the few things he’d brought from home. He touched the wood and thought of his parents. 

Kyunghee placed his food tray in front of him. 

“I know you’re upset with me, but you should eat something and rest,” 

she said, patting his back. 

Isak said, “Brother, I’m sorry about what happened. Sunja’s very young, and she was worried for us. The debt’s really mine, and—” 

“I can take care of this family,” Yoseb said. 

“That’s true, but I put a burden on you that you hadn’t anticipated. I put you in that position. The fault is mine. Sunja thought she was helping.” 

Yoseb folded his hands. He couldn’t disagree with Isak or be upset with him. It was hard to see his brother’s sad face. Isak needed to be protected like  a  fine  piece  of  porcelain.  All  night,  Yoseb  had  nursed  a  bottle  of doburoku  at  a  bar  that  Koreans  frequented  not  far  from  the  train  station, wondering  all  the  while  if  he  should’ve  brought  the  frail  Isak  to  Osaka. 

How long would Isak live? What would happen to Isak if Sunja was not a

good  woman  after  all?  Kyunghee  was  already  so  attached  to  the  girl,  and once the baby came, Yoseb was responsible for one more. His parents and in-laws were counting on him. At the crowded bar, men were drinking and making jokes, but there hadn’t been a soul in that squalid room—smelling of  burnt  dried  squid  and  alcohol—who  wasn’t  worried  about  money  and facing the terror of how he was supposed to take care of his family in this strange and difficult land. 

Yoseb covered his face with his hands. 

“Brother,  you’re  a  very  good  man,”  Isak  said.  “I  know  how  hard  you work.” 

Yoseb wept. 

“Will you forgive Sunja? For not going to you first? Will you forgive me for making you take on a debt? Can you forgive us?” 

Yoseb  said  nothing.  The  moneylender  would  see  him  like  all  the  other men  who  sponged  off  their  wives  toiling  in  factories  or  working  as domestics. His wife and pregnant sister-in-law had paid his debt with what was likely a stolen watch. What could he do? 

“You have to go to work, don’t you?” Yoseb asked. “It’s Sunday.” 

“Yes, Sister said she’d stay here with Sunja and the baby.” 

“Let’s go,” Yoseb said. 

He would forgive. It was too late for anything else. 

When the men stepped outside the house, Yoseb held his brother’s hand. 

“So you’re a father now.” 

“Yes.” Isak smiled. 

“Good,” Yoseb said. 

“I want you to name him,” Isak said. “It takes a lot of time for us to write to Father and to wait. You’re the head of our house here—” 

“It shouldn’t be me.” 

“It must be you.” 

Yoseb took a breath and faced the empty street, and it came to him. 

“Noa.” 

“Noa,” Isak repeated, smiling. “Yes. That’s wonderful.” 

“Noa—because he obeyed and did what the Lord asked. Noa—because

he believed when it was impossible to do so.” 

“Maybe you should give the sermon today,” Isak said, patting his brother on the back. 

The  brothers  walked  briskly  toward  the  church,  their  bodies  close,  one tall, frail, and purposeful, and the other short, powerful, and quick. 

BOOK II

Motherland

1939–1962

 

I thought that no matter how many hills and brooks you crossed,  the  whole  world  was  Korea  and  everyone  in  it was Korean. 

—Park Wan-suh

1

Osaka, 1939

Yoseb inhaled deeply and planted his feet squarely on the threshold—

ready to be tackled by a six-year-old boy who had been waiting all week for his bag of taffy. He slid open the front door, steeling himself for what would come. 

But nothing. 

There was no one in the front room. Yoseb smiled. Noa must be hiding. 

“Yobo. I’ve arrived,” he shouted in the direction of the kitchen. 

Yoseb closed the door behind him. 

Pulling  out  the  packet  of  candy  from  his  coat  pocket,  Yoseb  said dramatically,  “Huh,  I  wonder  where  Noa  could  be.  I  suppose  if  he  isn’t home,  then  I  can  eat  his  share  of  the  candy.  Or  I  can  put  it  aside  for  his brother.  Maybe  today  would  be  a  good  day  for  baby  Mozasu  to  have  his first taste of candy. One can never be too young for a treat! He’s already a month old. Before you know it, Mozasu and I’ll be wrestling, too, just like Noa  and  me!  He’ll  need  some  pumpkin  taffy  to  make  him  stronger.”  Not hearing  a  sound,  Yoseb  unfolded  the  crinkly  paper  with  a  flourish  and pretended to put a chunk of taffy in his mouth. 

“Wah, this is the best batch of pumpkin taffy that Piggy  ajumma has ever made!  Yobo,”  he  shouted,  “come  out  here,  you  must  have  some  of  this! 

Really  tasty!”  he  said,  making  chewing  noises  while  checking  behind  the clothing chest and the screen door—Noa’s usual hiding spots. 

The  mere  mention  of  Noa’s  infant  brother,  Mozasu,  should  have  made the boy bolt out from hiding. Normally a well-behaved child, Noa had been in trouble at home lately for pinching his brother, given the chance. 

Yoseb  checked  the  kitchen,  but  there  was  no  one  there.  The  stove  was cool to the touch, and the side dishes had been put out on the small table by the door; the rice pot was empty. Dinner was always made by the time he came home. The soup kettle was half-filled with water, cut-up potatoes, and onions, waiting to be put on the fire. Saturday evening meals were Yoseb’s favorite, because there was no work on Sundays, and yet nothing had been prepared.  After  a  leisurely  Saturday  dinner,  the  family  would  go  to  the bathhouse  together.  He  opened  the  kitchen  back  door  and  stuck  his  head out,  only  to  face  the  filthy  gutters.  Next  door,  Piggy   ajumma’s oldest girl was  fixing  supper  for  her  family  and  didn’t  even  look  out  from  her  open window. 

They could have gone to the market, he supposed. Yoseb sat down on a floor cushion in the front room and opened up one of his many newspapers. 

Printed columns of words about the war floated in front of his eyes—Japan would  save  China  by  bringing  technological  advancements  to  a  rural economy;  Japan  would  end  poverty  in  Asia  and  make  it  prosper;  Japan would protect Asia from the pernicious hands of Western imperialism; and only Germany, Japan’s true and fearless ally, was fighting the evils of the West. Yoseb didn’t believe any of it, but propaganda was inescapable. Each day, Yoseb read three or four papers to glean some truth from the gaps and overlaps.  Tonight,  all  the  papers  repeated  virtually  the  same  things;  the censors must’ve been working especially hard the night before. 

In the quiet of the house, Yoseb felt impatient and wanted his dinner. If Kyunghee had gone to pick up something at the market, there was still no reason why Sunja, Noa, and the baby would’ve gone, too. No doubt, Isak was busy at church. Yoseb put on his shoes. 

On the street, no one knew where his wife was, and when he reached the church, his brother wasn’t there. The office in the back was empty, except for  the  usual  group  of  women  seated  on  the  floor,  their  heads  bowed, mumbling their prayers. 

He waited for a long time until the women raised their heads. 

“I’m sorry to bother you, but have you seen Pastor Baek or Pastor Yoo?” 

The  women,  middle-aged   ajumma s  who  came  to  church  nearly  every

evening to pray, recognized him as Pastor Baek’s older brother. 

“They’ve  taken  him,”  the  eldest  one  cried,  “and  Pastor  Yoo  and  the Chinese boy Hu. You have to help them—” 

“What?” 

“The  police  arrested  them  this  morning—when  everyone  went  to  the Shinto  shrine  to  bow,  one  of  the  village  leaders  noticed  Hu  mouthing  the words  of  the  Lord’s  Prayer  when  they  were  supposed  to  be  pledging allegiance  to  the  Emperor.  The  police  officer  who  was  supervising questioned Hu, and Hu told him that this ceremony was idol worshipping and he wouldn’t do it anymore. Pastor Yoo tried to tell the police that the boy  was  misinformed,  and  that  he  didn’t  mean  anything  by  it,  but  Hu refused to agree with Pastor Yoo. Pastor Baek tried to explain, too, but Hu said he was willing to walk into the furnace. Just like Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego! Do you know that story?” 

“Yes, yes,” Yoseb said, annoyed by their religious excitement. “Are they at the station now?” 

The women nodded. 

Yoseb ran outside. 

Noa was sitting on the steps of the police station, holding his baby brother, who was asleep. 

“Uncle,” Noa whispered, smiling with relief. “Mo is very heavy.” 

“You’re a very good brother, Noa,” Yoseb said. “Where’s your aunt?” 

“In there.” He tilted his head toward the station, unable to use his hands. 

“Uncle, can you hold Mozasu? My arms hurt.” 

“Can  you  wait  here  just  a  little  longer?  I’ll  be  right  back,  or  I’ll  send your mother outside.” 

“Umma said she’d give me a treat if I didn’t pinch Mozasu and kept him still. They won’t let babies inside,” Noa said soberly. “But I’m hungry now. 

I’ve been here forever and ever.” 

“Uncle will give you a treat, too, Noa. Uncle will be right back,” Yoseb said. 

“But, Uncle—Mo’s—” 

“Yes, Noa, but you’re very strong.” 

Noa straightened his shoulders and sat up. He didn’t want to disappoint his uncle, who was his favorite person. 

Yoseb  was  about  to  open  the  door  of  the  station,  but  he  turned  at  the sound of Noa’s voice. 

“Uncle, what do I do if Mozasu cries?” 

“You should sing him a song while you walk back and forth. The way I did when you were his age. Maybe you remember?” 

“No, I don’t remember,” he said, looking tearful. 

“Uncle will be right out.” 

The police wouldn’t let them see Isak. The women had been waiting inside the  station,  with  Sunja  going  outside  to  check  on  Noa  and  Mozasu  every few  minutes.  Children  weren’t  allowed  in  the  station,  so  Kyunghee  had remained  near  the  front  desk,  since  she  was  the  one  who  spoke  Japanese. 

When  Yoseb  entered  the  waiting  area,  Kyunghee  gasped,  then  exhaled. 

Seated beside her, Sunja was doubled over, weeping. 

“Do they have Isak?” Yoseb asked. 

Kyunghee nodded. 

“You have to talk quietly,” she said, continuing to pat Sunja on the back. 

“I don’t know who’s listening.” 

Yoseb whispered, “The ladies at the church told me what happened. Why did that boy make such a fuss about the bowing?” Back home, the colonial government had been rounding up Christians and making them bow at the shrines each morning. Here, the volunteer community leaders made you do this only once or twice a week. “Is there a fine we can pay?” 

“I don’t think so,” Kyunghee said. “The officer told us to go home, but we waited in case they’d let him out—” 

“Isak can’t be inside a jail,” Yoseb said. “He can’t.” 

At the front desk, Yoseb lowered his shoulders and bowed deeply from the waist. 

“My brother’s in poor health, sir; he has been this way since he was a boy, and it would be difficult for him to be in jail. He just recovered from

tuberculosis. Is there any way he can go home and come back to the station tomorrow so he can be questioned?” Yoseb asked, using honorific Japanese. 

The officer shook his head politely, indifferent to these appeals. The cells were full of Koreans and Chinese, and according to their family members, nearly  all  of  them  had  some  sort  of  serious  health  problem  that  should preclude  them  from  jail  time.  Although  the  officer  felt  bad  for  the  man pleading for his truant brother, there was nothing he could do. The minister would be held for a very long time—these religious activists always were. 

In times of war, there had to be crackdowns against troublemakers for the sake  of  national  security.  It  was  pointless  to  say  any  of  this,  however. 

Koreans caused trouble, then made excuses. 

“You and the women should go home. The minister is being questioned, and you will not be able to see him. You’re wasting your time.” 

“You see, sir, my brother isn’t against the Emperor or the government in any  way.  He’s  never  been  involved  in  anything  against  the  government,” 

Yoseb said. “My brother is not interested in politics, and I’m sure he—” 

“He’s not allowed to have visitors. If he’s cleared of all charges, you can be  assured  that  he’ll  be  released  and  sent  home.”  The  officer  smiled politely. “No one wants to keep an innocent man here.” The officer believed this—the Japanese government was a fair and reasonable one. 

“Is there anything I can do?” Yoseb said in a lowered voice, patting his pockets for his wallet. 

“There’s nothing you or I can do,” the officer said, peeved. “And I hope you’re  not  suggesting  a  bribe.  Making  such  an  attempt  would  only exacerbate  your  brother’s  crime.  He  and  his  colleagues  refused  to acknowledge loyalty to the Emperor. This is a serious offense.” 

“I  didn’t  mean  any  harm.  I  beg  your  pardon  for  my  foolish  words—I would never insult your honor, sir.” Yoseb would have crawled on his belly across the floor of the station if that would have made Isak free. Their eldest brother, Samoel, had been the brave one, the one who would’ve confronted the officers with audacity and grace, but Yoseb knew he was no hero. He would have borrowed more money and sold their shack if the police would take  a  bribe  in  exchange  for  Isak;  Yoseb  didn’t  see  the  point  of  anyone dying for his country or for some greater ideal. He understood survival and family. 

The  officer  adjusted  his  spectacles  and  looked  past  Yoseb’s  shoulder, 

though no one else was standing there. 

“Perhaps you can take your women home? They have no place here. The boy and the baby are outside. You people are always letting your kids play in the streets even in the evening. They should be at home. If you don’t take care  of  your  children,  they’ll  end  up  in  jail  one  day,”  the  officer  said, appearing  exhausted.  “Your  brother  will  be  staying  here  tonight.  Do  you understand?” 

“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir. I’m sorry to bother you. May I bring him his things tonight?” 

The officer replied patiently. “In the morning. You can bring him clothes and  food.  Religious  books  are  not  allowed,  however.  Also,  all  reading material  must  be  in  Japanese.”  The  officer’s  tone  of  voice  was  calm  and thoughtful.  “Unfortunately,  he  cannot  have  visitors.  I’m  very  sorry  about that.” 

Yoseb  wanted  to  believe  that  this  uniformed  man  was  not  all  bad—he was just another man who was doing a job he didn’t like, and he was tired because it was the end of the week. Perhaps he, too, wanted his dinner and his bath. Yoseb saw himself as a rational person, and it was too simplistic to believe  that  all  Japanese  police  officers  were  evil.  Also,  Yoseb  needed  to believe  that  there  were  decent  people  watching  over  his  brother;  the alternative was unbearable. 

“We shall bring his things tomorrow morning, then,” Yoseb said, peering into the guarded eyes of the officer. “Thank you, sir.” 

“Of course.” 

The man tipped his head slightly. 

Noa was allowed to eat all the taffy and to play outside, and while Sunja fixed dinner in the kitchen, Yoseb fielded Kyunghee’s questions. She was standing with Mozasu tied to her back with a narrow blanket. 

“Can you contact someone?” she asked quietly. 

“Who?” 

“The Canadian missionaries,” she suggested. “We met them a few years ago.  Remember?  They  were  so  nice,  and  Isak  said  they  send  money regularly to support the church. Maybe they can explain to the police that

the  pastors  weren’t  doing  anything  wrong.”  Kyunghee  paced  in  small circles, and Mozasu burbled contentedly. 

“How would I reach them?” 

“By letter?” 

“Can I write them in Korean? How long would it take for them to get the letter and to reply? How long can Isak survive in—?” 

Sunja entered the room and untied Mozasu from Kyunghee’s back and took him to the kitchen to nurse. The scent of steaming barley rice filled the small house. 

“I don’t think the missionaries spoke Korean. Can you get someone to help you write a proper letter in Japanese?” Kyunghee asked. 

Yoseb  said  nothing.  He  would  write  a  letter  to  them  somehow,  but  he didn’t  see  why  the  police  would  care  what  a  Canadian  missionary  had  to say when there was a war going on. A letter would take at least a month. 

Sunja returned with Mozasu. 

“I  put  together  some  things  for  him.  Can  I  take  them  tomorrow morning?” she asked. 

“I’ll take them,” Yoseb said. “Before work.” 

“Can  you  ask  your  boss  to  help?  Maybe  they’ll  listen  to  a  Japanese?” 

Kyunghee said. 

“Shimamura-san  would  never  help  anyone  in  jail.  He  thinks  that Christians are rebels. The people who were in charge of the March 1  demo were Christians. All the Japanese know that. I don’t even tell him that I go to church. I don’t tell him anything. He’d just fire me if he thought I was mixed up in any kind of protest activity. Then where would we be? There are no jobs for people like me.” 

No one said anything after that. Sunja called Noa in from the street. It was time for him to eat. 

2

Each morning, Sunja walked to the police station and handed over three onigin made with barley and millet. If there was money in the budget for a chicken  egg,  she’d  hard-boil  it,  soak  the  peeled  egg  in  vinegary  shoyu  to supplement  Isak’s  modest  bento.  No  one  could  be  sure  if  the  food  ever reached  him,  but  she  couldn’t  prove  that  it  didn’t.  Everyone  in  the neighborhood  knew  someone  who’d  gone  to  jail,  and  the  wildly  varying reports were at best troubling and at worst terrifying. Yoseb wouldn’t speak about Isak, but Isak’s arrest had altered him considerably. Patches of gray smudged  his  once  jet-black  hair,  and  he  suffered  from  intense  stomach cramps. He stopped writing to his parents, who couldn’t be told about Isak, so Kyunghee wrote to them instead, making excuses. At meals, Yoseb put aside much of his food for Noa, who sat beside him quietly. Yoseb and Noa shared a kind of unspeakable grief over Isak’s absence. 

Despite numerous personal appeals, no one had been allowed to see Isak, but the family believed he was alive, because the police had not told them otherwise. The elder minister and the sexton remained in jail as well, and the  family  hoped  that  the  three  of  them  sustained  each  other  somehow, though no one knew how the prisoners were being housed. A day after the arrest, the police had come to the house to confiscate Isak’s few books and papers.  The  family’s  comings  and  goings  were  monitored;  a  detective visited  them  every  few  weeks  to  ask  questions.  The  police  padlocked  the church, yet the congregation continued to meet secretly in small groups led by  the  church  elders.  Kyunghee,  Sunja,  and  Yoseb  never  met  the parishioners for fear of putting them in danger. By now, most of the foreign missionaries back home and here had returned to their native countries. It was  rare  to  see  a  white  person  in  Osaka.  Yoseb  had  written  the  Canadian

missionaries about Isak but there’d been no reply. 

Under  considerable  duress,  the  decision-making  authority  of  the Presbyterian  Church  had  deemed  that  the  mandatory  Shinto  shrine ceremony  was  a  civic  duty  rather  than  a  religious  one  even  though  the Emperor, the head of the state religion, was viewed as a living deity. Pastor Yoo,  a  faithful  and  pragmatic  minister,  had  believed  that  the  shrine ceremony, where the townspeople were required to gather and perform rites, was in fact a pagan ritual drummed up to rouse national feeling. Bowing to idols  was  naturally  offensive  to  the  Lord.  Nevertheless,  Pastor  Yoo  had encouraged Isak, Hu, and his congregation to observe the Shinto bowing for the greater good. He didn’t want his parishioners, many of them new to the faith,  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  government’s  predictable  response  to disobedience—prison and death. Pastor Yoo found support for such ideas in the letters of the apostle Paul. So whenever these gatherings at the nearest shrine  took  place,  their  frequency  varying  from  town  to  town,  the  elder pastor, Isak, and Hu had attended when necessary along with whoever else was in the church building at the time. However, with his weakened vision, the  elder  pastor  had  not  known  that  at  every  Shinto  ceremony,  the  sexton Hu had been mouthing Our Father like an unbroken loop even as he bowed, sprinkled water, and clapped his hands like all the others. Isak had noticed Hu  doing  this,  of  course,  but  had  said  nothing.  If  anything,  Isak  had admired Hu’s faith and gesture of resistance. 

For Sunja, Isak’s arrest had forced her to consider what would happen if the unthinkable  occurred.  Would  Yoseb  ask  her  and  her  children  to  leave? 

Where would she go, and how would she get there? How would she take care of her children? Kyunghee would not ask her to leave, but even so—

she was only a wife. Sunja had to have a plan and money in case she had to return home to her mother with her sons. 

So  Sunja  had  to  find  work.  She  would  become  a  peddler.  It  was  one thing for a woman like her mother to take in boarders and to work alongside her husband to earn money, but something altogether different for a young woman to stand in an open market and sell food to strangers, shouting until she was hoarse. Yoseb tried to forbid her from getting a job, but she could

not listen to him. With tears streaming down her face, she told her brother-in-law that Isak would want her to earn money for the boys’ schooling. To this,  Yoseb  yielded.  Nevertheless,  he  prohibited  Kyunghee  from  working outdoors, and his wife obeyed. Kyunghee was allowed to put up the pickles with  Sunja,  but  she  couldn’t  sell  them.  Yoseb  couldn’t  protest  too  much, because  the  household  was  desperate  for  cash.  In  a  way,  the  two  women tried to obey Yoseb in their disobedience—they did not want to hurt Yoseb by  defying  him,  but  the  financial  burdens  had  become  impossible  for  one man to bear alone. 

Her first day of selling took place one week after Isak was jailed. After Sunja dropped off Isak’s food at the jail, she wheeled a wooden cart holding a large clay jar of kimchi to the market. The open-air market in Ikaino was a patchwork  of  modest  retail  shops  selling  housewares,  cloth,  tatami  mats, and  electric  goods,  and  it  hosted  a  collection  of  hawkers  like  her  who peddled homemade scallion pancakes, rolled sushi, and soybean paste. 

Kyunghee  watched  Mozasu  at  home.  Nearby  the  peddlers  selling gochujang and  doenjang, Sunja noticed two young Korean women selling fried wheat crackers. Sunja pushed her cart toward them, hoping to wedge herself between the cracker stall and the soybean-paste lady. 

“You can’t stink up our area,” the older of the two cracker sellers said. 

“Go to the other side.” She pointed to the fish section. 

When  Sunja  moved  closer  to  the  women  selling  dried  anchovies  and seaweed, the older Korean women there were even less welcoming. 

“If  you  don’t  move  your  shitty-looking  cart,  I’ll  have  my  sons  piss  in your  pot.  Do  you  understand,  country  girl?”  said  a  tall  woman  wearing  a white kerchief on her head. 

Sunja couldn’t come up with a reply, because she was so surprised. None of  them  were  even  selling  kimchi,  and   doenjang  could  smell  just  as pungently. 

She kept walking until she couldn’t see any more  ajumma s and ended up near  the  train  station  entrance  where  the  live  chickens  were  sold.  The intense funk of animal carcasses overwhelmed her. There was a space big enough for her cart between the pig butcher and the chickens. 

Wielding  an  enormous  knife,  a  Japanese  butcher  was  cutting  up  a  hog the  size  of  a  child.  A  large  bucket  filled  with  its  blood  rested  by  his  feet. 

Two hogs’ heads lay on the front table. The butcher was an older gentleman

with ropy, muscular arms and thick veins. He was sweating profusely, and he smiled at her. 

Sunja  parked  her  cart  in  the  empty  lot  by  his  stall.  Whenever  a  train stopped,  she  could  feel  its  deceleration  beneath  her  sandals.  Passengers would  disembark,  and  many  of  them  came  into  the  market  from  the entrance nearby, but none stopped in front of her cart. Sunja tried not to cry. 

Her  breasts  were  heavy  with  milk,  and  she  missed  being  at  home  with Kyunghee  and  Mozasu.  She  wiped  her  face  with  her  sleeves,  trying  to remember what the best market  ajumma s would do back home. 

“Kimchi! Delicious kimchi! Try this delicious kimchi, and never make it at  home  again!”  she  shouted.  Passersby  turned  to  look  at  her,  and  Sunja, mortified,  looked  away  from  them.  No  one  bought  anything.  After  the butcher  finished  with  his  hog,  he  washed  his  hands  and  gave  her  twenty-five sen, and Sunja filled a container for him. He didn’t seem to mind that she didn’t speak Japanese. He put down the kimchi container by the hogs’

heads,  then  reached  behind  his  stall  to  take  out  his  bento.  The  butcher placed a piece of kimchi neatly on top of his white rice with his chopsticks and ate a bite of rice and kimchi in front of her. 

“Oishi!  Oishi nee!  Honto oishi,” he said, smiling. 

She bowed to him. 

At  lunchtime,  Kyunghee  brought  Mozasu  for  her  to  nurse,  and  Sunja remembered that she had no choice but to recoup the cost of the cabbage, radish, and spices. At the end of the day, she had to show more money than they had spent. 

Kyunghee watched the cart while Sunja nursed the baby with her body turned toward the wall. 

“I’d be afraid,” Kyunghee said. “You know how I’d said that I wanted to be a kimchi  ajumma? I don’t think I realized what it would feel like to stand here. You’re so brave.” 

“What  choice  do  we  have?”  Sunja  said,  looking  down  at  her  beautiful baby. 

“Do you want me to stay here? And wait with you?” 

“You’ll get in trouble,” Sunja said. “You should be home when Noa gets back from school, and you have to make dinner. I’m sorry I can’t help you, Sister.” 

“What I have to do is easy,” Kyunghee said. 

It was almost two o’clock in the afternoon, and the air felt cooler as the sun turned away from them. 

“I’m not going to come home until I sell the whole jar.” 

“Really?” 

Sunja  nodded.  Her  baby,  Mozasu,  resembled  Isak.  He  looked  nothing like Noa, who was olive-skinned with thick, glossy hair. Noa’s bright eyes noticed everything. Except for his mouth, Noa looked almost identical to a young  Hansu.  At  school,  Noa  sat  still  during  lessons,  waited  for  his  turn, and he was praised as an excellent student. Noa had been an easy baby, and Mozasu was a happy baby, too, delighted to be put into a stranger’s arms. 

When  she  thought  about  how  much  she  loved  her  boys,  she  recalled  her parents.  Sunja  felt  so  far  away  from  her  mother  and  father.  Now  she  was standing outside a rumbling train station, trying to sell kimchi. There was no  shame  in  her  work,  but  it  couldn’t  be  what  they’d  wanted  for  her. 

Nevertheless, she felt her parents would have wanted her to make money, especially now. 

When Sunja finished nursing, Kyunghee put down two sugared rolls and a bottle filled with reconstituted powdered milk on the cart. 

“You have to eat, Sunja. You’re nursing, and that’s not easy, right? You have to drink lots of water and milk.” 

Kyunghee turned around so Sunja could tuck Mozasu into the sling on Kyunghee’s back. Kyunghee secured the baby tightly around her torso. 

“I’ll go home and wait for Noa and make dinner. You come home soon, okay? We’re a good team.” 

Mozasu’s  small  head  rested  between  Kyunghee’s  thin  shoulder  blades, and Sunja watched them walk away. When they were out of earshot, Sunja cried  out,  “Kimchi!  Delicious  Kimchi!  Kimchi!  Delicious  kimchi!  Oishi desu!  Oishi kimchi!” 

This sound, the sound of her own voice, felt familiar, not because it was her own voice but because it reminded her of all the times she’d gone to the market as a girl—first with her father, later by herself as a young woman, then as a lover yearning for the gaze of her beloved. The chorus of women hawking had always been with her, and now she’d joined them. “Kimchi! 

Kimchi!  Homemade  kimchi!  The  most  delicious  kimchi  in  Ikaino!  More tasty  than  your  grandmother’s!  Oishi  desu,  oishi!”  She  tried  to  sound cheerful,  because  back  home,  she  had  always  frequented  the  nicest

 ajumma s.  When  the  passersby  glanced  in  her  direction,  she  bowed  and smiled at them. “Oishi!  Oishi!” 

The pig butcher looked up from his counter and smiled at her proudly. 

That evening, Sunja did not go home until she could see the bottom of the kimchi jar. 

Sunja  could  sell  whatever  kimchi  she  and  Kyunghee  were  able  to  make now,  and  this  ability  to  sell  had  given  her  a  kind  of  strength.  If  they could’ve made more kimchi, she felt sure that she could’ve sold that, too, but  fermenting  took  time,  and  it  wasn’t  always  possible  to  find  the  right ingredients.  Even  when  they  made  a  decent  profit,  the  price  of  cabbages could spike the following week, or worse, they might not be available at all. 

When there were no cabbages at the market, the women pickled radishes, cucumbers,  garlic,  or  chives,  and  sometimes  Kyunghee  pickled  carrots  or eggplant without garlic or chili paste, because the Japanese preferred those kinds  of  pickles.  Sunja  thought  about  land  all  the  time.  The  little  kitchen garden  her  mother  had  kept  behind  the  house  had  nourished  them  even when  the  boardinghouse  guests  ate  double  what  they  paid.  The  price  of fresh  food  kept  rising,  and  working  people  couldn’t  afford  the  most  basic things. Recently, some customers would ask to buy a cup of kimchi because they couldn’t afford a jar of it. 

If  Sunja  had  no  kimchi  or  pickles  to  sell,  she  sold  other  things.  Sunja roasted sweet potatoes and chestnuts; she boiled ears of corn. She had two carts now, and she hooked them together like the cars of a train—one cart with a makeshift coal stove and another just for pickles. The carts took up the better part of the kitchen because they had to keep them inside the house for fear of them getting stolen. She split the profits equally with Kyunghee, and  Sunja  put  aside  every  sen  she  could  for  the  boys’  schooling  and  for their passage back home in case they had to leave. 

When Mozasu turned five months old, Sunja also started selling candy at the  market.  Produce  had  been  getting  increasingly  scarce,  and  by  chance, Kyunghee had obtained two wholesale bags of black sugar from a Korean grocer whose Japanese brother-in-law worked in the military. 

At  her  usual  spot  by  the  pork  butcher’s  stall,  Sunja  stoked  the  fire

beneath the metal bowl used to melt sugar. The steel box that functioned as a stove had been giving her trouble; as soon as she could afford it, Sunja planned on having a proper stove made up for her cart. She rolled up her sleeves  and  moved  the  live  coals  around  to  circulate  the  air  and  raise  the heat. 

“Agasshi, do you have kimchi today?” 

It was a man’s voice, and Sunja looked up. About Isak’s age, he dressed like  her  brother-in-law—tidy  without  drawing  much  attention  to  himself. 

His face was cleanly shaven, and his fingernails were neat. The lenses of his eyeglasses  were  very  thick  and  the  heavy  frames  detracted  from  his  good features. 

“No, sir. No kimchi today. Just candy. It’s not ready, though.” 

“Oh. When will you have kimchi again?” 

“Hard  to  say.  There  isn’t  much  cabbage  to  buy,  and  the  last  batch  of kimchi we put up isn’t ready yet,” Sunja said, and returned to the coals. 

“A day or two? A week?” 

Sunja looked up again, surprised by his insistence. 

“The kimchi might be ready in three days or so. If the weather continues to get warmer, then it might be two, sir. But I don’t think that soon,” Sunja said flatly, hoping he would let her start with the candy making. Sometimes, she sold a few bags to the young women getting off the train at about this time. 

“How much kimchi will you have when it’s ready?” 

“I’ll have plenty to sell you. Do you know how much you want? Most of my customers like to bring their own containers. How much do you think you  need?”  Her  customers  were  Korean  women  who  worked  in  factories and didn’t have time to make their own  banchan. When she sold sweets, her customers were children and young women. “Just stop by in three days, and if you bring your own container—” 

The young man laughed. 

“Well, I was thinking that maybe you can sell me everything you make.” 

He adjusted his eyeglasses. 

“You can’t eat that much kimchi! And how would you keep the rest of it fresh?” Sunja replied, shaking her head at his foolishness. “It’s going to be summer in a couple of months, and it’s hot here already.” 

“I’m  sorry.  I  should  have  explained.  My  name  is  Kim  Changho,  and  I

manage the  yakiniku restaurant right by Tsuruhashi Station. News of your excellent kimchi has spread far.” 

Sunja  wiped  her  hands  on  the  apron  that  she  wore  over  her  padded cotton vest, keeping a close eye on the hot coals. 

“It’s my sister-in-law who knows what she’s doing in the kitchen. I just sell it and help her make it.” 

“Yes,  yes,  I’d  heard  that,  too.  Well,  I’m  looking  for  some  women  to make all the kimchi and  banchan for the restaurant. I can get you cabbage and—” 

“Where,  sir?  Where  do  you  get  cabbage?  We  looked  everywhere.  My sister-in-law goes to the market early in the morning and still—” 

“I can get it,” he said, smiling. 

Sunja didn’t know what to say. The candy-making metal bowl was hot already, and it was time to put in the sugar and water, but she didn’t want to start now. If this person was serious, then it was important to hear him out. 

She  heard  the  train  arrive.  She  had  missed  her  first  batch  of  customers already. 

“Where’s your restaurant again?” 

“It’s the big restaurant on the side street behind the train station. On the same  street  as  the  pharmacy—you  know,  the  one  owned  by  the  skinny Japanese  pharmacist,  Okada-san?  He  wears  black  glasses  like  mine?”  He pushed his glasses up on his nose again and smiled like a boy. 

“Oh, I know where the pharmacy is.” 

This  was  the  shop  where  all  the  Koreans  went  when  they  were  really sick and were willing to pay for good medicine. Okada was not a friendly man, but he was honest; he was reputed to be able to cure many ailments. 

The  young  man  didn’t  seem  like  anyone  who  was  trying  to  take advantage of her, but she couldn’t be sure. In the few short months working as a vendor, she’d given credit to a few customers and had not been repaid. 

People were willing to lie about small things and to disregard your interests. 

Kim  Changho  gave  her  a  business  card.  “Here’s  the  address.  Can  you bring your kimchi when it’s done? Bring all of it. I’ll pay you in cash, and I’ll get you more cabbage.” 

Sunja nodded, not saying anything. If she had only one customer for the kimchi, then she’d have more time to make other things to sell. The hardest part had been procuring the cabbage, so if this man could do that, then the

work would be much easier. Kyunghee had been scouring the market with Mozasu  on  her  back  to  track  down  these  scarce  ingredients  and  often returned  home  with  a  light  market  basket.  Sunja  promised  to  bring  him what she had. 

The restaurant was the largest storefront on the short side street parallel to the  train  station.  Unlike  the  other  businesses  nearby,  its  sign  was  lettered handsomely  by  a  professional  sign  maker.  The  two  women  admired  the large  black  letters  carved  and  painted  into  a  vast  wooden  plaque.  They wondered what the words meant. It was obviously a Korean  galbi house—

the scent of grilled meat could be detected from two blocks away—but the sign had difficult Japanese lettering that neither of them could read. Sunja grasped the handlebar of the carts loaded with all the kimchi they’d put up in  the  past  few  weeks  and  took  a  deep  breath.  If  the  kimchi  sales  to  the restaurant were steady, they’d have a regular income. She could buy eggs more  often  for  Isak’s  and  Noa’s  meals  and  get  heavy  wool  cloth  for Kyunghee, who wanted to sew new coats for Yoseb and Noa. 

Yoseb had been staying away from home, complaining of the sight and smell of all the kimchi ingredients spilling out from the kitchen. He didn’t want to live in a kimchi factory. His dissatisfaction was the primary reason why the women preferred to sell candy, but sugar was far more difficult to find  than  cabbage  or  sweet  potatoes.  Although  Noa  didn’t  complain  of  it, the kimchi odor affected him the most. Like all the other Korean children at the  local  school,  Noa  was  taunted  and  pushed  around,  but  now  that  his clean-looking  clothes  smelled  immutably  of  onions,  chili,  garlic,  and shrimp paste, the teacher himself made Noa sit in the back of the classroom next  to  the  group  of  Korean  children  whose  mothers  raised  pigs  in  their homes.  Everyone  at  school  called  the  children  who  lived  with  pigs   buta. 

Noa, whose  tsumei  was  Nobuo,  sat  with  the   buta  children  and  was  called garlic turd. 

At  home,  Noa  asked  his  aunt  for  snacks  and  meals  that  didn’t  contain garlic, hoping this would keep the children from saying bad things to him. 

When she asked him why, Noa told his aunt the truth. Even though it cost more,  Kyunghee  bought  Noa  large  milk  rolls  from  the  bakery  for  his

breakfast and made him potato  korokke or  yakisoba for his school bento. 

The  children  were  merciless,  but  Noa  didn’t  fight  them;  rather,  he worked harder on his studies, and to the surprise of his teachers, he was the first or second in academic rank in his second grade class. At school, Noa didn’t have any friends, and when the Korean children played in the streets, he didn’t join them. The only person he looked forward to seeing was his uncle, but these days, when Yoseb was home, he was not himself. 

In the street, Kyunghee and Sunja stood quietly in front of the restaurant, unable to enter. The door was ajar, but it was not open for business. Despite Kyunghee’s initial excitement at the prospect of selling more kimchi, she’d been reasonably skeptical of the offer and had refused to let Sunja go to an unknown place by herself. She’d insisted on coming along, toting Mozasu on her back. They didn’t tell Yoseb about coming here, but they planned on telling him everything after the first meeting. 

“I’ll  stay  out  here  with  the  cart  and  wait,”  Kyunghee  said,  patting Mozasu rhythmically with her right hand. The baby was resting calmly in the sling on Kyunghee’s back. 

“Shouldn’t I bring the kimchi in?” Sunja said. 

“Why don’t you ask him to come outside?” 

“We can both go in.” 

“I’ll wait outside. But if you don’t come outside soon, then I’ll come in, all right?” 

“But how will you push the cart and—” 

“I can push the cart. Mozasu is fine.” The baby was now laying his head drowsily on her back, and she kept up a reliable rocking motion. 

“Go  on  inside,  and  I’ll  wait.  Just  ask  Kim  Changho  to  come  out  here. 

Don’t keep talking to him inside, all right?” 

“But I thought we’d talk to him together.” 

Sunja  stared  at  her  sister-in-law,  not  knowing  what  she  should  do,  and then  it  occurred  to  her  that  her  sister-in-law  was  afraid  of  going  into  the restaurant.  If  her  husband  asked  her  what  had  happened,  she  could  say honestly that she was outside the whole time. 

3

April 1940

It was the second restaurant she’d ever entered in her life. The main dining room was nearly five times the size of the udon shop in Busan that she’d gone  to  with  Isak.  The  lingering  smells  of  burnt  meat  and  stale  cigarettes from the previous night scraped against her throat. There were two rows of dining tables on a raised tatami-covered platform. Below the platform was a space  for  the  guests’  shoes.  In  the  open  kitchen,  a  teenage  boy  wearing  a white undershirt washed beer glasses two at a time. With the water running and  the  clinking  of  the  glasses,  he  didn’t  hear  Sunja  coming  into  the restaurant;  she  stared  at  his  sharp  profile  as  he  concentrated  on  his  work, hoping he’d notice her. 

The man from the market had never specified the time of day for her to show up with the kimchi, and it had never occurred to her to ask whether to come  by  in  the  morning  or  afternoon.  Kim  Changho  was  nowhere  to  be seen. What if he was out today, or only came to work in the afternoons or evenings?  If  she  went  outside  without  speaking  to  anyone,  Kyunghee wouldn’t  know  what  to  do,  either.  Her  sister-in-law  was  susceptible  to endless worrying, and Sunja didn’t want to trouble her. 

The water in the sink stopped running, and the boy, exhausted from the night-to-morning shift, stretched his neck from side to side. The sight of the young woman surprised him. She wore Japanese trousers and a blue padded jacket that had faded from wear. 

“Agasshi,  we’re  not  open  right  now,”  he  said  in  Korean.  She  wasn’t  a customer, but she wasn’t a beggar, either. 

“Excuse  me.  I’m  sorry  to  bother  you,  but  do  you  know  where  Kim Changho is? He asked me to come by with the kimchi. I wasn’t sure when I

—” 

“Oh! Is that you?” The boy grinned in relief. “He’s just down the street. 

Boss told me to get him if you came by today. Why don’t you sit down and wait.  Did  you  bring  the  kimchi?  The  customers  have  been  complaining about the side dishes for weeks. Are you going to work here, too? Hey, how old  are  you  anyway?”  The  boy  wiped  his  hands  and  opened  the  kitchen door  in  the  back.  The  new  girl  was  sweet  looking,  he  thought.  The  last kimchi  ajumma had been a toothless granny who’d yell at him for nothing. 

She’d been fired for drinking too much, but this one looked younger than he was. 

Sunja was confused. “Wait, Kim Changho isn’t here?” 

“Have a seat. I’ll be right back!” 

The boy dashed out the door. 

Sunja looked around, and, realizing that she was alone, she went outside. 

Kyunghee whispered, “The baby’s sleeping now.” 

She  was  sitting  on  the  stubby  market  stool  that  normally  hung  on  the side of the cart. In the bright sun, a slight breeze blew against the puffy tufts of  Mozasu’s  hair  and  his  smooth  brow.  It  was  early  in  the  morning,  and there  were  hardly  any  passersby  on  the  street.  The  pharmacy  hadn’t  even opened yet. 

“Sister,  the  manager’s  on  his  way.  Do  you  still  want  to  wait  outside?” 

Sunja asked. 

“I’ll be fine here. You go in and wait by the window so I can see you. 

But come out when he gets here, okay?” 

Back inside the restaurant, Sunja was afraid to sit down, so she stood a foot away from the door. She knew they could have sold this kimchi today at the market. She was here because the man said he could get her cabbage

—that  alone  was  enough  to  make  her  stay  and  wait  for  him.  Without  the cabbage, they didn’t have a business. 

“How  nice  to  see  you!”  Changho  shouted,  entering  from  the  kitchen door. “Did you bring the kimchi?” 

“My sister-in-law is watching the cart outside. We brought a lot.” 

“I hope you can make more.” 

“You haven’t even tried it,” she said quietly, confused by his enthusiasm. 

“I’m  not  worried.  I  did  my  homework.  I  heard  it’s  the  most  delicious kimchi  in  Osaka,”  he  said,  walking  briskly  toward  her.  “Let’s  go  outside then.” 

Kyunghee bowed as soon as she saw him, but she didn’t speak. 

“Hello, my name is Kim Changho,” he said to Kyunghee, a little startled by  the  woman’s  beauty.  He  couldn’t  tell  how  old  she  was,  but  the  baby strapped to her back was not more than six months. 

Kyunghee said nothing. She looked like a lovely, nervous mute. 

“Is this your baby?” he asked. 

Kyunghee shook her head, glancing at Sunja. This wasn’t like talking to Japanese  merchants—something  she  had  to  do  to  buy  groceries  or  things needed  for  the  house.  Yoseb  had  told  her  on  numerous  occasions  that money and business were men’s issues, and suddenly she felt incapable of saying anything. Before getting here, it had been her plan to help Sunja with the negotiations, but now she felt like if she said anything at all, it would be unhelpful or wrong. 

Sunja asked, “Do you know how much kimchi you’d like? On a regular basis,  I  mean.  Do  you  want  to  wait  to  make  an  order  after  you  try  this batch?” 

“I’ll  take  all  that  you  can  make.  I’d  prefer  it  if  you  could  make  the kimchi here. We have refrigerators and a very cold basement that might be good for your purposes.” 

“In  the  kitchen?  You  want  me  to  pickle  the  cabbages  in  there?”  Sunja pointed to the restaurant door. 

“Yes.” He smiled. “In the mornings, you two can come here and make the kimchi and the side dishes. I have cooks who come in the afternoon to cut up the meat and fix the marinades, but they can’t handle the kimchi and banchan. That sort of thing requires more skills. The customers want more home-style dishes for the pickles. Any fool can make a marinade and grill meat, but the customer needs a fine array of  banchan to make him feel like he’s dining like a king, wouldn’t you say?” 

He could see that they were still uncomfortable with the idea of working in a restaurant kitchen. 

“Besides, you wouldn’t want me to deliver boxes and boxes of cabbages

and vegetables to your house, would you? That can’t be very comfortable.” 

Kyunghee  whispered  to  Sunja,  “We  can’t  work  in  a  restaurant.  We should make the kimchi at home, and we can bring it here. Or maybe they can send the boy to pick it up if we can’t carry it all.” 

“You  don’t  understand.  I  need  you  to  make  much,  much  more  than whatever  you  were  making  before.  I  manage  two  more  restaurants  that require  kimchi  and   banchan—this  one  is  the  central  location  and  has  the largest  kitchen,  though.  I’d  provide  all  your  ingredients;  you  just  tell  me what you want. You’d be paid a good salary.” 

Kyunghee and Sunja looked at him, not understanding his meaning. 

“Thirty-five yen a week. Each of you would get the same amount, so it’s seventy yen in total.” 

Sunja opened her mouth in surprise. Yoseb earned forty yen per week. 

“And every now and then, you could take some meat home,” Kim said, smiling.  “We’d  have  to  see  what  we  can  do  to  make  you  enjoy  working here. Maybe even some grains. If you need a lot of things for your personal use, I’d charge you what we pay for them. We can figure that out later.” 

After  paying  for  the  ingredients,  Sunja  and  Kyunghee  netted approximately ten to twelve yen a week from peddling. If they could earn seventy yen a week, they wouldn’t worry about money. No one at home had eaten any chicken or fish in the past six months because of the cost; buying beef or pork had been impossible. Each week, they still bought soup bones and splurged on the occasional egg for the men, but Sunja wanted the boys, Isak,  and  Yoseb  to  eat  other  things  besides  potatoes  and  millet.  With  so much money, it would be possible to send more money to their parents, who were suffering far more than they let on. 

“And  I  could  be  home  when  my  older  son,  Noa,  gets  home?”  Sunja blurted out without meaning to. 

“Yes, of course,” Kim said, as if he’d thought this through. “You could leave  when  you’re  done  with  your  work.  You  could  be  finished  before lunchtime even, I suppose.” 

“And  my  baby?”  Sunja  pointed  to  Mozasu,  who  slept  on  Kyunghee’s back. “Can I bring him? He could stay in the kitchen with us,” Sunja said, unable to imagine leaving him with one of the overwhelmed grannies in the neighborhood who watched the workingwomen’s children. When there was no  one  to  watch  them  at  home,  or  if  they  couldn’t  afford  to  pay  the

grannies, a few women at the market tethered their very small children to their  carts  with  ropes;  the  children  with  ropes  crisscrossed  around  their torsos seemed happy to wander about or to sit by their mothers playing with cheap toys. 

“The baby’s not much trouble at all,” Sunja said. 

“Why  not?  As  long  as  the  work  gets  done,  I  don’t  care.  There  are  no customers here at the time you’re working, so they won’t be in the way,” he said. “If you need to stay late and your older son wants to come here from school, that’s fine, too. There are no customers here until dinnertime.” 

Sunja nodded. She wouldn’t have to spend another cold winter standing outside,  waiting  for  customers,  all  the  while  worrying  about  Noa  and Mozasu. 

Seeing that Kyunghee looked more agitated than pleased at this job offer, which  would  change  everything,  Sunja  said,  “We  have  to  ask.  For permission—” 

After the dinner table was cleared, Kyunghee brought her husband a cup of barley  tea  and  his  ashtray  so  he  could  have  a  smoke.  Seated  cross-legged near  his  uncle,  Noa  played  with  the  brightly  painted  top  that  Yoseb  had bought for him, and the child was mesmerized by how fast it could go. The wooden toy made a pleasant whirring sound against the floor. Sunja, who held Mozasu in her arms, watched Noa playing, wondering how Isak was. 

Ever  since  Isak’s  arrest,  Sunja  barely  spoke  at  home  for  fear  of  upsetting her  brother-in-law,  whose  temperament  had  altered  greatly.  When  he  got angry,  he’d  walk  out  of  the  house;  sometimes,  he  wouldn’t  even  bother coming home until very late. The women knew that Yoseb would be against their working at the restaurant. 

After  Yoseb  lit  his  cigarette,  Kyunghee  told  him  about  the  jobs.  They needed the work, she said, using the word “work” rather than “money.” 

“Have you lost your mind? First, you make food to sell under a bridge by a train station, and now both of you want to work in a restaurant where men  drink  and  gamble?  Do  you  know  what  kind  of  women  go  into  such places?  What,  next  you’ll  be  pouring  drinks  for—?”  Yoseb’s  unsmoked cigarette  shook  between  his  trembling  fingers.  He  was  not  a  violent  man, 

but he’d had enough. 

“Did you actually go into the restaurant?” he asked, not quite believing this conversation. 

“No,”  Kyunghee  replied.  “I  stayed  outside  with  the  baby,  but  it  was  a big, clean place. I saw it through the window. I went to the meeting with Sunja  in  case  the  place  wasn’t  nice,  because  Sunja  shouldn’t  go  there  by herself.  The  manager,  Kim  Changho,  was  a  well-spoken  young  man,  and you  should  meet  him.  We  wouldn’t  go  there  if  you  didn’t  give  us permission.  Yobo—”  Kyunghee  could  see  how  upset  he  was,  and  she  felt terrible  about  it.  She  respected  no  one  more  than  Yoseb.  Women complained about their men, but there were no bad words to say about her husband;  Yoseb  was  a  truthful  person  who  kept  his  word.  He  tried  all  he could; he was honorable. He did his best to care for them. 

Yoseb  put  out  his  cigarette.  Noa  stopped  spinning  his  top,  and  the  boy looked frightened. 

“Maybe if you met him…” Kyunghee knew they had to take this job, but she knew her husband would be humiliated by it. In their marriage, he had denied her nothing except for her ability to earn money. He believed that a hardworking man should be able to take care of his family by himself, and that a woman should remain at home. 

“He  could  pay  you  instead  of  us;  we’d  just  save  the  money  for  Isak’s boys  and  send  more  to  your  parents.  We  could  buy  Isak  better  food  and send him clothes. We don’t know when he’s—” Kyunghee stopped herself. 

Noa  had  sidled  up  closer  to  his  uncle  as  if  to  protect  him.  He  patted  his uncle’s leg the same way his uncle would pat his back when Noa fell down or got discouraged by something at school. 

Although his head was full of arguments, Yoseb couldn’t speak. He was working  two  full-time  jobs—managing  two  factories  for  Shimamura-san, who paid him half the salary of one Japanese foreman. Lately, he repaired broken  metal  presses  for  a  Korean  factory  owner  after  hours,  but  he couldn’t count on that for a steady income. He hadn’t mentioned this recent job to his wife, because he preferred for her to think of him working as a manager  rather  than  as  a  mechanic.  Before  he  got  home,  he’d  scrub  his hands  ruthlessly  with  a  bristle  brush,  using  diluted  lye  to  get  out  the machine  oil  stains  from  beneath  his  fingernails.  No  matter  how  hard  he worked, there was never enough money—the yen notes and coins dropped

out of his pockets as if they had gaping holes. 

Japan  was  in  trouble;  the  government  knew  it  but  would  never  admit defeat.  The  war  in  China  pressed  on  without  letting  up.  His  boss’s  sons fought for Japan. The older one, who’d been sent to Manchuria, had lost a leg last year, then died of gangrene, and the younger one had been sent to Nanjing  to  take  his  place.  In  passing,  Shimamura-san  had  mentioned  that Japan was in China in order to stabilize the region and to spread peace, but the  way  he’d  said  all  this  hadn’t  given  Yoseb  the  impression  that Shimamura-san believed any of it. The Japanese were going deeper into the war  in  Asia,  and  there  were  rumors  that  Japan  would  soon  be  allied  with Germany in the war in Europe. 

Did  any  of  this  matter  to  Yoseb?  He’d  nodded  at  the  right  times  and grunted  affirmatively  when  his  Japanese  boss  was  talking  about  the  war, because  you  were  supposed  to  nod  when  the  boss  told  you  his  stories. 

Nevertheless,  to  every  Korean  he  knew,  Japan’s  expanding  war  in  Asia seemed  senseless.  China  was  not  Korea;  China  was  not  Taiwan;  China could lose a million people and still keep on. Pockets of it may fall, but it was  an  unfathomably  vast  nation;  it  would  endure  by  sheer  number  and resolve. Did Koreans want Japan to win? Hell no, but what would happen to them  if  Japan’s  enemies  won?  Could  the  Koreans  save  themselves? 

Apparently  not.  So  save  your  own  ass—this  was  what  Koreans  believed privately. Save your family. Feed your belly. Pay attention, and be skeptical of the people in charge. If the Korean nationalists couldn’t get their country back, then let your kids learn Japanese and try to get ahead. Adapt. Wasn’t it as simple as that? For every patriot fighting for a free Korea, or for any unlucky  Korean  bastard  fighting  on  behalf  of  Japan,  there  were  ten thousand compatriots on the ground and elsewhere who were just trying to eat. In the end, your belly was your emperor. 

Every  minute  of  every  day,  Yoseb  was  worried  about  money.  If  he dropped dead, what would happen? What kind of man let his wife work in a restaurant?  He  knew  this   galbi  place—who  didn’t?  There  were  three  of them, and the main one was by the train station. The gangsters ate there late at night. The owners set the prices high to keep out the regular people and the  Japanese.  When  Yoseb  had  needed  to  borrow  money  for  Isak  and Sunja’s  passage  to  Japan,  he’d  gone  there.  Which  was  worse—his  wife working  for  moneylenders  or  him  owing  money  to  them?  For  a  Korean

man, the choices were always shit. 

4

May 1942

Noa Baek was not like the other eight-year-olds in the neighborhood. 

Each morning before he went to school, he’d scrub his face until his cheeks were pink, smooth three drops of oil on his black hair, then comb it away from his forehead as his mother had taught him to do. After a breakfast of barley  porridge  and  miso  soup,  he’d  rinse  his  mouth  and  check  his  white teeth in the small round hand mirror by the sink. No matter how tired his mother was, she made certain that Noa’s shirts were ironed the night before. 

In his clean, pressed clothes, Noa looked like a middle-class Japanese child from  a  wealthier  part  of  town,  bearing  no  resemblance  to  the  unwashed ghetto children outside his door. 

At  school,  Noa  was  strong  in  both  arithmetic  and  writing,  and  he surprised the gym teacher with his adept hand-eye coordination and running speed.  After  classes  ended,  he  tidied  the  shelves  and  swept  the  classroom floors without being asked and walked home alone, trying not to draw any undue  attention  to  himself.  The  boy  managed  to  look  unafraid  of  the tougher  children  while  setting  himself  apart  with  a  perimeter  of  quiet privacy that could not be disturbed. When he got home, Noa went directly into the house to do his schoolwork without lingering on the street with the neighborhood children who played until dinnertime. 

When  his  mother  and  aunt  moved  the  kimchi-making  business  to  the restaurant, the house no longer smelled relentlessly of fermenting cabbage

and  pickles.  Noa  hoped  he’d  no  longer  be  called  garlic  turd.  If  anything, lately,  their  house  smelled  less  of  cooking  than  the  others  in  the neighborhood,  because  his  mother  and  aunt  brought  home  cooked  food from  the  restaurant  for  their  family  meals.  Once  a  week,  Noa  got  to  eat tidbits of grilled meat and white rice from the restaurant. 

Like  all  children,  Noa  kept  secrets,  but  his  were  not  ordinary  ones.  At school, he went by his Japanese name, Nobuo Boku, rather than Noa Baek; and though everyone in his class knew he was Korean from his Japanized surname,  if  he  met  anyone  who  didn’t  know  this  fact,  Noa  wasn’t forthcoming  about  this  detail.  He  spoke  and  wrote  better  Japanese  than most  native  children.  In  class,  he  dreaded  the  mention  of  the  peninsula where  his  parents  were  born  and  would  look  down  at  his  papers  if  the teacher mentioned anything about the colony of Korea. Noa’s other secret: His father, a Protestant minister, was in jail and had not been home in over two years. 

The boy tried to remember his father’s face, but couldn’t. When asked to tell  family  stories  for  class  assignments,  Noa  would  say  that  his  father worked as a foreman at a biscuit factory, and if some children inferred that Uncle Yoseb was his father, Noa didn’t correct them. The big secret that he kept from his mother, aunt, and even his beloved uncle was that Noa did not believe in God anymore. God had allowed his gentle, kindhearted father to go to jail even though he had done nothing wrong. For two years, God had not answered Noa’s prayers, though his father had promised him that God listens very carefully to the prayers of children. Above all the other secrets that  Noa  could  not  speak  of,  the  boy  wanted  to  be  Japanese;  it  was  his dream to leave Ikaino and never to return. 

It was a late spring afternoon; Noa returned home from school and found his snack, left out by his mother before she went to work, waiting for him on  the  low  table  where  the  family  ate  their  meals  and  where  Noa  did  his homework. Thirsty, he went to the kitchen to get some water, and when he returned to the front room, he screamed. Near the door, there was a gaunt and filthy man collapsed on the floor. 

Unable to rise, the man leaned the weight of his torso on the crook of his

left elbow and tried to push up to sitting, but couldn’t manage it. 

Should  he  scream  again?  Noa  wondered.  Who  would  help  him?  His mother, aunt, and uncle were at work, and no one had heard him the first time.  The  beggar  didn’t  seem  dangerous;  he  looked  ill  and  dirty,  but  he could’ve  been  a  thief,  too.  Uncle  had  warned  Noa  about  burglars  and thieves who could break into the house looking for food or valuables. He had  fifty  sen  in  his  trouser  pocket;  he’d  been  saving  it  for  an  illustrated book on archery. 

The man was sobbing now, and Noa felt bad for him. There were many poor  people  on  his  street,  but  no  one  looked  as  bad  as  this  man.  The beggar’s face was covered with sores and black scabs. Noa reached into his pocket and pulled out the coin. Afraid that the man might grab his leg, Noa stepped just close enough to place the coin on the floor near the man’s hand. 

Noa planned to walk backward to the kitchen and run out the back door to get help, but the man’s crying made him pause. 

The  boy  looked  carefully  at  the  man’s  gray-bearded  face.  His  clothes were torn and grimy but the shape of them resembled the dark suits that his principal at school wore. 

“It’s  appa,” the man said. 

Noa gasped and shook his head no. 

“Where’s your mother, child?” 

It was his voice. Noa took a step forward. 

“Umma’s at the restaurant,” Noa replied. 

“Where?” 

Isak was confused. 

“I’ll go now. I’ll get  umma. Are you okay?” The boy didn’t know what to  do  exactly.  He  was  still  a  bit  afraid,  though  it  was  certainly  his  father. 

The  gentle  eyes  beneath  the  jutting  cheekbones  and  scaly  skin  were  the same. Perhaps his father was hungry. His shoulder bones and elbows looked like  sharp  tree  branches  beneath  his  clothing.  “Do  you  want  to  eat something,  appa?” 

Noa pointed to the snack his mother had left for him: two rice balls made from barley and millet. 

Isak shook his head, smiling at the boy’s concern. 

“Aga—can you get me some water?” 

When  Noa  returned  with  the  cup  of  cold  water  from  the  kitchen,  he

found his father slumped to the ground with his eyes closed. 

“Appa!  Appa!  Wake  up!  I  have  your  water!  Drink  your  water,  appa,” 

Noa cried. 

Isak’s eyes fluttered open; he smiled at the sight of the boy. 

“Appa is tired, Noa.  Appa is going to sleep.” 

“Appa, drink your water.” The boy held out the cup. 

Isak raised his head and took a long drink, then closed his eyes again. 

Noa  bent  over,  close  to  his  father’s  mouth,  to  check  his  breathing.  He retrieved his own pillow and tucked it beneath Isak’s bushy gray head. He covered  him  with  the  heavy  quilt  and  closed  the  front  door  behind  him quietly. Noa ran to the restaurant as fast as he could. 

He  burst  into  the  dining  room,  but  no  one  in  the  front  area  noticed  him. 

None of the grown men working there minded the well-mannered boy who never said much beyond yes and no. The toddler, Mozasu, was sleeping in the  storage  room;  when  awake,  the  two-year-old  tore  through  the  dining room,  but  asleep,  he  looked  like  a  statue  of  an  angel.  The  manager,  Kim, never complained about Sunja’s children. He bought toys and comic books for the boys and occasionally watched Mozasu while he worked in the back office. 

“Uh-muh.” Kyunghee looked up from her work, alarmed at the sight of Noa, breathless and pale, in the kitchen. “You’re sweating. Are you okay? 

We’ll  be  done  soon.  Are  you  hungry?”  She  got  up  from  her  crouching position to fix him something to eat, thinking he’d come by because he was lonesome. 

“Appa came home. He looks sick. He’s sleeping on the floor at home.” 

Sunja,  who’d  been  quiet,  waiting  for  Noa  to  speak  up,  wiped  her  wet hands on her apron. “Can I go? Can we leave now?” She’d never left early before. 

“I’ll  stay  here  and  finish.  You  go.  Hurry.  I’ll  be  right  there  after  I’m done.” 

Sunja reached for Noa’s hand. 

Halfway down the street, Sunja shouted, “Mozasu!” and Noa looked up at her. 

“Umma, Aunt will bring him home,” he said calmly. 

She clutched his hand tighter and walked briskly toward the house. 

“You ease my mind, Noa. You ease my mind.” 

Without the others around, it was possible to be kind to her son. Parents weren’t  supposed  to  praise  their  children,  she  knew  this—it  would  only invite  disaster.  But  her  father  had  always  told  her  when  she  had  done something well; out of habit, he would touch the crown of her head or pat her back, even when she did nothing at all. Any other parent might’ve been chided by the neighbors for spoiling a daughter, but no one said anything to her  crippled  father,  who  marveled  at  his  child’s  symmetrical  features  and normal  limbs.  He  took  pleasure  in  just  watching  her  walk,  talk,  and  do simple  sums  in  her  head.  Now  that  he  was  gone,  Sunja  held  on  to  her father’s warmth and kind words like polished gems. No one should expect praise, and certainly not a woman, but as a little girl, she’d been treasured, nothing less. She’d been her father’s delight. She wanted Noa to know what that was like, and she thanked God with every bit of her being for her boys. 

On  the  days  when  it  felt  impossible  to  live  another  day  in  her  husband’s brother’s house—to work through the whole day and night, then to wake up again before the sun to start again, to go to the jail and hand over a meal for her husband—Sunja thought of her father, who had never said a cross word to her. He had taught her that children were a delight, that her boys were her delight. 

“Did  appa look very ill?” Sunja asked. 

“I didn’t know it was him.  Appa was usually so clean and nicely dressed, nee?” 

Sunja  nodded,  having  told  herself  long  ago  to  expect  the  worst.  The elders in her church had warned her that the Korean prisoners were usually sent home just as they were about to die, so that they would not die in jail. 

The  prisoners  were  beaten,  starved,  and  made  to  go  without  clothing  to weaken them. Just that morning, Sunja had gone to the jail to drop off his meal and this week’s clean set of undershirts. Brother had been right then; her  husband  must  not  have  received  any  of  these  things.  As  she  and  Noa walked down the busy street, oblivious to the crowds, it occurred to her that she’d never thought to prepare her son for Isak’s return. If anything, she had

been so busy preparing for his death by working and saving money that she had  not  thought  about  what  the  boy  might  think  of  his  father’s  return,  or worse, his death. She felt so sorry for not having told him what to expect. It must have been a terrible shock for Noa. 

“Did you eat your snack today?” she asked him, not knowing what else to say. 

“I left it for  appa.” 

They  passed  a  small  throng  of  uniformed  students  streaming  out  of  a confectionery,  eating  their  treats  happily.  Noa  looked  down,  but  didn’t  let go of his mother’s hand. He knew the children, but none were his friends. 

“Do you have homework?” 

“Yes, but I’ll do it when I get home,  umma.” 

“You  never  give  me  any  trouble,”  she  said,  feeling  his  five  perfect fingers in hers, and she felt grateful for his sturdiness. 

Sunja opened the door slowly. Isak was on the floor, sleeping. She knelt by his  head.  Dark,  mottled  skin  stretched  across  his  eye  sockets  and  high cheekbones.  His  hair  and  beard  were  nearly  white;  he  looked  years  older than his brother, Yoseb. He was no longer the beautiful young man who had rescued  her  from  disgrace.  Sunja  removed  his  shoes  and  peeled  off  his holey socks. Dried crusts of blood covered his cracked, raw soles. The last toe on his left foot had turned black. 

“Umma,” Noa said. 

“Yes.” She turned to him. 

“Should I get Uncle?” 

“Yes.” She nodded, trying not to cry. “Shimamura-san may not let him leave early, Noa. If Uncle can’t leave, tell him that I’m with him. We don’t want Uncle to get in trouble at work. Okay?” 

Noa ran out of the house, not bothering to slide the door fully shut, and the incoming breeze woke Isak; he opened his eyes to see his wife sitting next to him. 

“Yobo,” he said. 

Sunja nodded. “You’re home. We’re so glad you’re home.” 

He smiled. The once-straight white teeth were either black or missing—

the lower set cracked off entirely. 

“You’ve suffered so much.” 

“The sexton and the pastor died yesterday. I should’ve died a long time ago.” 

Sunja shook her head, unable to speak. 

“I’m home. Every day, I imagined this. Every minute. Maybe that’s why I  am  here.  How  hard  it  must  have  been  for  you,”  he  said,  looking  at  her kindly. 

Sunja shook her head no, wiping her face with her sleeve. 

The Korean and Chinese girls who worked at the factory smiled at the sight of Noa. The delicious scent of freshly baked wheat biscuits greeted him. A girl  packing  biscuit  boxes  near  the  door  whispered  in  Korean  how  tall  he was  getting.  She  pointed  to  his  uncle’s  back.  He  was  crouched  over  the motor  of  the  biscuit  machine.  The  factory  floor  was  long  and  narrow, designed like a wide tunnel for the easy inspection of workers; the owner had  set  up  the  imposing  biscuit  machine  by  his  office  with  the  conveyor belts moving toward the workers, who stood in parallel rows. Yoseb wore safety goggles and was poking about inside the service panel with a pair of pliers. He was the foreman and the factory mechanic. 

The din of the heavy machine blocked out normal speaking voices. The girls  weren’t  supposed  to  talk  on  the  factory  floor,  but  it  was  nearly impossible  to  catch  them  if  they  whispered  and  made  minimal  facial gestures.  Forty  unmarried  girls,  hired  for  their  nimble  fingers  and  general tidiness, packed twenty thin wheat biscuits into wooden boxes that would be  shipped  to  army  officers  stationed  in  China.  For  every  two  broken biscuits,  a  girl  was  fined  a  sen  from  her  wages,  forcing  her  to  work carefully  as  well  as  swiftly.  If  she  ate  even  a  broken  corner  of  a  biscuit, she’d  be  terminated  immediately.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  the  youngest  girl gathered  the  broken  biscuits  into  a  fabric-lined  basket,  packed  them  into small bags, and was sent out to the market to sell them at a discount. If they didn’t sell, Shimamura sold the biscuits for a nominal amount to the girls who packed the most boxes without error. Yoseb never took broken biscuits home, because the girls made so little money, and even the biscuit crumbs

meant so much to them. 

Shimamura, the owner, was sitting in his glassed-in office, the size of a utility closet. The plate glass window allowed him to check the girls’ work. 

If he found anything amiss, he’d call Yoseb in and tell him to give the girl a warning. On the second warning, the girl was sent home without pay even if she’d worked for six days. Shimamura kept a blue, cloth-bound ledger with warnings listed next to the names of the girls, written in his beautiful hand-lettering. His foreman, Yoseb, disliked punishing the girls, and Shimamura viewed this as yet another example of Korean weakness. The factory owner believed  that  if  all  Asian  countries  were  run  with  a  kind  of  Japanese efficiency,  attention  to  detail,  and  high  level  of  organization,  Asia  as  a whole  would  prosper  and  rise—able  to  defeat  the  unscrupulous  West. 

Shimamura  believed  he  was  a  fair  person  with  perhaps  a  too-soft  heart, which  explained  why  he  hired  foreigners  when  many  of  his  friends wouldn’t. When they pointed to the slovenly nature of foreigners, he argued how  could  the  foreigners  ever  learn  unless  the  Japanese  taught  them  to loathe  incompetence  and  sloth.  Shimamura  felt  that  standards  must  be maintained for posterity’s sake. 

Noa had been inside the factory only once, and Shimamura had not been pleased then. About a year ago, Kyunghee was sick with a high fever and had fainted in the market, and Noa was sent to fetch Yoseb. Shimamura had reluctantly  allowed  Yoseb  to  attend  to  his  wife.  The  next  morning,  he explained  to  Yoseb  that  there  would  be  no  repeat  of  this  incident.  How could  he,  Shimamura  asked,  run  two  machine-based  factories  without  the presence of a competent mechanic? If Yoseb’s wife were to get sick again, she would have to rely on a neighbor or family member; Yoseb could not just leave the factory in the middle of the day. The biscuits were war orders, and they had to be met promptly. Men were risking their lives fighting for their country; each family must make sacrifices. 

So  when  Shimamura  spotted  the  boy  again,  only  a  year  after  that uncomfortable speech that he had not wanted to make, he was furious. He snapped  open  his  newspaper,  pretending  not  to  see  the  boy  tapping  his uncle’s lower back. 

Yoseb, startled by Noa’s light touch, turned around. 

“Uh-muh, Noa, what are you doing here?” 

“Appa’s home.” 

“Really?” 

“Can you come home now?” Noa asked. His mouth made a small red O. 

Yoseb removed his goggles and sighed. 

Noa  closed  his  mouth  and  looked  down.  His  uncle  would  have  to  get permission, the way his mother had to ask Aunt Kyunghee or Mr. Kim—the same way he had to ask his teacher to go to the bathroom. Sometimes, when it  was  sunny  outside,  Noa  dreamed  of  not  telling  anyone  and  going  to Osaka  Bay.  He’d  been  there  once  with  his  father  on  a  Saturday  afternoon when he was very small, and he always thought it would be nice to go back. 

“Is he all right?” Yoseb studied Noa’s expression. 

“Appa’s hair turned gray. He’s very dirty.  Umma’s with him. She said if you can’t come, it’s okay, but she wanted you to know. To know that  appa is home now.” 

“Yes, that’s right. I’m glad to know.” 

Yoseb  glanced  at  Shimamura,  who  was  holding  up  his  newspaper, pretending to read, but was no doubt watching him very carefully. His boss would  never  allow  him  to  go  home  now.  Also,  unlike  when  Kyunghee fainted,  Shimamura  knew  Isak  had  gone  to  jail  because  the  sexton  had refused to observe the Shinto ceremony. Periodically, the police came by to question Yoseb as well as to speak with Shimamura, who defended Yoseb as a model Korean. If he left, Yoseb would lose his job, and if the police picked him up for questioning, he would lose his character reference. 

“Listen,  Noa,  work  will  be  done  in  less  than  three  hours,  and  then afterwards, I’ll hurry home. It’s irresponsible for me to leave now without finishing my work. As soon as I’m done, I’ll run home faster than you can run. Tell your  umma that I’ll come home right away. And if your  appa asks, tell him that Brother will be there very soon.” 

Noa nodded, not understanding why Uncle was crying. 

“I have to finish, Noa, so you run home. Okay?” Yoseb put on his safety goggles and turned around. 

Noa  moved  quickly  toward  the  entrance.  The  sweet  scent  of  biscuits wafted out the door. The boy had never eaten one of those biscuits, never having asked for one. 

5

Noa burst through the doors of the house, his head and heart pounding from the breathless run. Gulping in deep lungfuls of air, he told his mother, 

“Uncle can’t leave work.” 

Sunja  nodded,  having  expected  this.  She  was  bathing  Isak  with  a  wet towel.

Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

Isak’s  eyes  were  closed  but  his  chest  rose  and  fell  slightly,  punctuated now and then by a series of painful coughs. A light blanket covered his long legs. Ridges of scar tissue furrowed diagonally across Isak’s shoulders and discolored  torso,  making  haphazard  diamond-shaped  intersections.  Every time Isak coughed, his neck flushed red. 

Noa approached his father quietly. 

“No, no. Move back,” Sunja said sternly. “Appa is very sick. He has a bad cold.” 

She pulled the blanket up to Isak’s shoulders, though she wasn’t nearly finished with cleaning him. In spite of the strong soap and several changes of  basin  water,  his  body  emitted  a  sour  stench;  nits  clung  to  his  hair  and beard. 

Isak had been alert for a few moments, his violent coughs waking him, but  now  when  he  opened  his  eyes,  he  didn’t  say  anything,  and  when  he looked at her, he didn’t seem to recognize her. 

Sunja  changed  the  compress  on  Isak’s  feverish  head.  The  nearest hospital was a long trolley ride away, and even if she could move him by herself,  an  all-night  wait  wouldn’t  ensure  that  a  doctor  would  see  him.  If she could tuck him into the kimchi cart and wheel him to the trolley stop, she could possibly get him into the car, but then what would she do with the cart itself? It wouldn’t pass through the trolley door. Noa might be able to

push  it  back  home,  but  then  how  would  she  get  Isak  from  the  stop  to  the hospital without the cart? And what if the driver wouldn’t let them board? 

More than once, she’d witnessed the trolley driver asking a sick woman or man to get off. 

Noa sat by his father’s legs to keep away from his coughing. He felt an urge to pat his father’s sharp knee bone—to touch him, to make sure he was real. The boy pulled out his notebook from his satchel to do his homework, keeping close watch on Isak’s breathing. 

“Noa, you have to put your shoes back on. Go to the drugstore and ask Pharmacist Kong to come. Can you tell him that it’s important—that  umma will  pay  him  double?”  Sunja  decided  that  if  the  Korean  pharmacist wouldn’t come, she’d ask Kyunghee to plead with the Japanese pharmacist to come by the house, though that was unlikely. 

The boy got up and left without a murmur. She could hear him running down the street in his even, rapid steps. 

Sunja wrung out the hand towel she was using to bathe Isak above the brass basin. Fresh welts from recent beatings and a number of older scars covered  his  wide,  bony  back.  She  felt  sick  as  she  washed  his  dark  and bruised frame. There was no one as good as Isak. He’d tried to understand her,  to  respect  her  feelings;  he’d  never  once  brought  up  her  shame.  He’d comforted her patiently when she’d lost the pregnancies between Noa and Mozasu. Finally, when she gave birth to their son, he’d been overjoyed, but she’d  been  too  worried  about  how  they’d  survive  with  so  little  money  to feel  his  happiness.  Now  that  he  was  back  home  to  die,  what  did  money matter, anyway? She should’ve done more for him; she should’ve tried to know him the way he had tried to know her; and now it was over. Even with his  gashed  and  emaciated  frame,  his  beauty  was  remarkable.  He  was  the opposite of her, really; where she was thick and short, he was slender and long-limbed—even  his  torn-up  feet  were  well  shaped.  If  her  eyes  were small and anxious, his were large and full of acceptance. The basin water was now gray, and Sunja got up to change it again. 

Isak  woke  up.  He  saw  Sunja  wearing  farmer  pants  and  walking  away from him. He called out to her, “Yobo,” but she didn’t turn around. He felt like he didn’t know how to raise his voice. It was as if his voice was dying while his mind was alive. 

“Yobo,” Isak mumbled, and he reached for her, but she was almost in the

kitchen  already.  He  was  in  Yoseb’s  house  in  Osaka.  This  had  to  be  true because he was, in fact, waking from a dream where he was a boy. In the dream,  Isak  had  been  sitting  on  a  low  bough  of  the  chestnut  tree  in  his childhood  garden;  the  scent  of  the  chestnut  blossoms  still  lingered  in  his nose.  It  was  like  many  of  the  dreams  he’d  had  in  prison  where,  while  he dreamed, he was aware that the dream itself wasn’t real. In real life, he’d never been on a tree. When he was young, the family gardener would prop him below that very tree to get some fresh air, but he’d never been strong enough to climb it the way Yoseb could. The gardener used to call Yoseb

“Monkey.”  In  the  dream,  Isak  was  hugging  the  thick  branches  tightly, unable to break from the embrace of the dark green foliage, the clusters of white blossoms with their dark pink hearts. From the house, cheerful voices of  the  women  called  to  him.  He  wanted  to  see  his  old  nursemaid  and  his sister, though they had died years ago; in the dream, they were laughing like girls. 

“Yobo—” 

“Uh-muh.” She put down the washbasin at the threshold of the kitchen and rushed back to him. “Are you all right? Can I get you something?” 

“My wife,” he said slowly. “How have you been?” Isak felt drowsy and uncertain, but relieved. Sunja’s face was different than he remembered—a little older, more weary. “How you must’ve struggled here. I am so sorry.” 

“Shhh—you must rest,” she said. 

“Noa.”  He  said  the  boy’s  name  like  he  remembered  something  good. 

“Where is he? He was here before.” 

“He went to fetch the pharmacist.” 

“He looks so healthy. And bright.” It was hard to get the words out, but his mind felt clear suddenly, and he wanted to tell her the things he’d been saving up for her. 

“You’re  working  at  a  restaurant  now?  Are  you  cooking  there?”  Isak began to cough and couldn’t stop. Pindots of blood splattered on her blouse, and she wiped his mouth with a towel. 

When he tried to sit up, she placed her left hand beneath his head and her right  over  his  chest  to  calm  him,  fearful  that  he  might  hurt  himself.  The coughs wracked his body. His skin felt hot even through the blankets. 

“Please rest. Later. We can talk later.” 

He shook his head. 

“No, no. I—I want to tell you something.” 

Sunja rested her hands on her lap. 

“My  life  wasn’t  important,”  he  said,  trying  to  read  her  eyes,  so  full  of anguish and exhaustion. He needed her to understand that he was thankful to her—for waiting for him, for taking care of the family. It humbled him to think  of  her  laboring  and  earning  money  for  their  family  when  he  wasn’t able  to  support  them.  Money  must’ve  been  very  hard  with  him  gone  and with inflation from the war. The prison guards had complained incessantly of  the  prices  of  things—no  one  had  enough  to  eat,  they  said.  Quit complaining about the bugs in the gruel.  Isak had prayed constantly for his family’s provision. “I brought you here and made your life more difficult.” 

She smiled at him, not knowing how to say— you saved me. Instead, she said,  “You  must  get  well.”  Sunja  covered  him  with  a  thicker  blanket;  his body was burning hot, but he shivered. “For the boys, please get well.”  How can I raise them without you? 

“Mozasu—where is he?” 

“At  the  restaurant  with  Sister.  Our  boss  lets  him  stay  there  while  we work.” 

Isak looked alert and attentive, as if all his pain had vanished; he wanted to know more about his boys. 

“Mozasu,”  Isak  said,  smiling.  “Mozasu.  He  saved  his  people  from slavery—” Isak’s head throbbed so intensely that he had to close his eyes again.  He  wanted  to  see  his  two  sons  grow  up,  finish  school,  and  get married.  Isak  had  never  wanted  to  live  so  much,  and  now,  just  when  he wanted to live until he was very old, he’d been sent home to die. “I have two sons,” he said. “I have two sons. Noa and Mozasu. May the Lord bless my sons.” 

Sunja watched him carefully. His face looked strange, yet peaceful. Not knowing what else to do, she kept talking. 

“Mozasu is becoming a big boy—always happy and friendly. He has a wonderful  laugh.  He  runs  everywhere.  So  fast!”  She  pumped  her  arms  to imitate  the  toddler’s  running,  and  she  found  herself  laughing,  and  he laughed, too. It occurred to her then that there was only one other person in the world who’d want to hear about Mozasu growing up so well, and until now, she’d forgotten that she could express a prideful joy in her boys. Even when  her  brother-  and  sister-in-law  were  pleased  with  the  children,  she

couldn’t  ignore  their  sadness  at  their  lack;  sometimes,  she  wanted  to  hide her delight from them for fear that it could be seen as a kind of boasting. 

Back  home,  having  two  healthy  and  good  sons  was  tantamount  to  having vast riches. She had no home, no money, but she had Noa and Mozasu. 

Isak’s eyes opened, and he looked at the ceiling. “I can’t go until I see them, Lord. Until I see my children to bless them. Lord, let me not go—” 

Sunja bowed her head, and she prayed, too. 

Isak closed his eyes again, his shoulders twitching in pain. 

Sunja placed her right hand on his chest to check his faint breathing. 

The  door  opened,  and  as  expected,  Noa  had  returned  home  alone.  The pharmacist couldn’t come now but promised to come later tonight. The boy returned to his spot by Isak’s feet and did his sums while his father slept. 

Noa wanted to show Isak his schoolwork; even Hoshii-sensei, the hardest teacher in his grade, told Noa that he was good at writing his letters and that he should work hard to improve his illiterate race: “One industrious Korean can inspire ten thousand to reject their lazy nature!” 

Isak continued to sleep, and Noa concentrated on his work. 

Later, when Kyunghee arrived home with Mozasu, the house felt lively for the first time since Isak’s arrest. Isak woke briefly to see Mozasu, who didn’t cry at the sight of the skeletal man. Mozasu called him “Papa” and patted  his  face  with  both  hands,  the  way  he  did  when  he  liked  someone. 

With  his  white,  chubby  hands,  Mozasu  made  little  pats  on  Isak’s  sunken cheeks.  The  toddler  sat  still  in  front  of  him  briefly,  but  as  soon  as  Isak closed his eyes, Kyunghee removed him, not wanting the baby to get sick. 

When  Yoseb  returned  home,  the  house  grew  somber  again,  because Yoseb wouldn’t ignore the obvious. 

“How could they?” Yoseb said, staring hard at Isak’s body. 

“My boy, couldn’t you just tell them what they wanted to hear? Couldn’t you  just  say  you  worshipped  the  Emperor  even  if  it  isn’t  true?  Don’t  you know that the most important thing is to stay alive?” 

Isak  opened  his  eyes  but  said  nothing  and  closed  his  eyes  again.  His eyelids felt so heavy that it was painful to keep them open. He wanted to speak with Yoseb, but the words would not come out. 

Kyunghee brought her husband a pair of scissors, a long razor blade, a cup of oil, and a basin of vinegar. 

“The nits and lice won’t die. He should be shaved. It must be so itchy for him,” she said, her eyes wet. 

Grateful to his wife for giving him something to do, Yoseb rolled up his sleeves, then poured the cup of oil over Isak’s head, massaging it into his scalp. 

“Isak-ah, don’t move,” Yoseb said, trying to keep his voice normal. “I’m going to get rid of all these itchy bastards.” 

Yoseb made clean strokes across Isak’s head and threw the cut hair into the metal basin. 

“Yah—Isak-ah.” Yoseb smiled at the memory. “You remember how the gardener  used  to  cut  our  hair  when  we  were  kids?  I  used  to  holler  like  a crazy animal but you never did. You sat there like a baby monk, calm and peaceful, and you never once complained.” Yoseb grew quiet, wanting what he saw in front of him not to be true. “Isak-ah, why did I bring you to this hell? I was so lonesome for you. I was wrong, you know, to bring you here, and  now  I’m  punished  for  my  selfishness.”  Yoseb  rested  his  blade  in  the basin. 

“I will not be all right if you die. Do you understand? You cannot die, my  boy.  Isak-ah,  please  don’t  die.  How  can  I  go  on?  What  will  I  tell  our parents?” 

Isak continued to sleep, oblivious to his family encircling his pallet. 

Yoseb wiped his eyes and shut his mouth, clamping down on his jaws. 

He picked up the blade again, working steadily to take off the bits of gray hair  remaining  on  his  head.  When  Isak’s  head  was  smooth,  Yoseb  poured oil over his brother’s beard. 

For the remainder of the evening, Yoseb, Kyunghee, and Sunja rid him of  nits  and  lice,  dropping  the  bugs  into  jars  of  kerosene,  only  stopping  to put  the  boys  to  bed.  Later,  the  pharmacist  came  to  tell  them  what  they already  knew.  There  was  nothing  a  hospital  or  a  doctor  could  do  for  Isak now. 

At dawn, Yoseb returned to work. Sunja remained with Isak, and Kyunghee

went  to  the  restaurant.  Yoseb  didn’t  bother  complaining  about  Kyunghee going to work alone. He was too tired to argue, and the wages were badly needed. Outside the house, the street was filled with the morning bustling of men and women heading to work and children running to school. Isak slept in the front room, his breathing fast and shallow. He was clean and smooth like an infant—all the hair from his body shaved. 

After  Noa  finished  breakfast,  he  laid  down  his  chopsticks  neatly  and looked up at his mother. 

“Umma, may I stay home?” he asked, never having dared to ask for such a thing, even when things were awful at school. 

Sunja looked up from her sewing, surprised. 

“Are you feeling ill?” 

He shook his head. 

Isak, who was half-awake, had heard the boy’s request. 

“Noa—” 

“Yes,  appa.” 

“Umma told me that you’re becoming a fine scholar.” 

The child beamed but, out of habit, looked down at his feet. 

When Noa received high marks in school, he thought first of his father. 

Yoseb had told the boy several times that his father had been a prodigy, having taught himself Korean, Classical Chinese, and Japanese from books with scant tutoring. By the time he went to seminary, Isak had already read the Bible several times. 

When  school  felt  difficult,  knowing  that  his  father  was  a  learned  man had strengthened the boy’s resolve to learn. 

“Noa.” 

“Yes,  appa?” 

“You  must  go  to  school  today.  When  I  was  a  boy,  I  wanted  to  go  to school with the other children very much.” 

The boy nodded, having heard this detail about his father before. 

“What else can we do but persevere, my child? We’re meant to increase our talents. The thing that would make your  appa happy is if you do as well as you’ve been doing. Wherever you go, you represent our family, and you must  be  an  excellent  person—at  school,  in  town,  and  in  the  world.  No matter  what  anyone  says.  Or  does,”  Isak  said,  then  paused  to  cough.  He knew it must be taxing for the child to go to a Japanese school. 

“You must be a diligent person with a humble heart. Have compassion for everyone. Even your enemies. Do you understand that, Noa? Men may be unfair, but the Lord is fair. You’ll see. You will,” Isak said, his exhausted voice tapering off. 

“Yes,  appa.” Hoshii-sensei had told him that he had a duty to Koreans, too;  one  day,  he  would  serve  his  community  and  make  Koreans  good children  of  the  benevolent  Emperor.  The  boy  stared  at  his  father’s  newly shaved  head.  His  bald  pate  was  so  white  in  contrast  to  his  dark,  sunken cheeks. He looked both new and ancient. 

Sunja felt bad for the child; he’d never had a day with both his parents and no one else. When she was growing up, even when there were others around, it had been just the three of them—her father, mother, and her—an invisible triangle. When she thought back to her life at home, this closeness was what she missed. Isak was right about school, but it wouldn’t be much longer.  Soon,  Isak  would  be  gone.  She  would  have  given  anything  to  see her father again, but how could she go against Isak’s wishes? Sunja picked up Noa’s satchel and handed it to the boy, who was crestfallen. 

“After school, come home straight away, Noa. We’ll be here,” Isak said. 

Noa remained fixed to his spot on the floor, unable to take his eyes off his father for fear that he’d disappear. The child hadn’t realized how much he’d  missed  his  father  until  he  returned.  The  ache  of  missing  him  had surfaced in his small, concave chest, and he felt anxious about the pain that was  sure  to  return.  If  he  remained  home,  Noa  felt  certain  that  his  father would be okay. They wouldn’t even have to talk. Why couldn’t he study at home the way his father had? Noa wanted to ask this, but it was not in his nature to argue. 

Isak,  however,  didn’t  want  Noa  to  see  him  like  this  anymore.  The  boy was already afraid, and there was no need to make him suffer any more than he already had. There were many things he hadn’t told the child yet about life, about learning, about how to talk to God. 

“Is it very hard at school?” Isak asked. 

Sunja  turned  to  look  at  the  boy’s  face;  she’d  never  thought  to  ask  him this. 

Noa shrugged. The work was okay, not impossible. The good students, who were all Japanese, the ones he admired, wouldn’t speak to him. They wouldn’t even look at him. He believed that he could enjoy going to school

if  he  were  a  regular  person  and  not  a  Korean.  He  couldn’t  say  this  to  his father  or  to  anyone  else,  because  it  was  certain  he’d  never  be  a  regular Japanese.  One  day,  Uncle  Yoseb  said,  they  would  return  to  Korea;  Noa imagined that life would be better there. 

Carrying  his  book  bag  and  bento,  Noa  lingered  by  the  front  door, memorizing his father’s kindly face. 

“Child, come here,” Isak said. 

Noa  approached  him  and  sat  on  bended  knees.  Please  God,  please. 

 Please make my father well. I’ll ask this just once more. Please.  Noa shut his eyes tightly. 

Isak took Noa’s hand and held it. 

“You are very brave, Noa. Much, much braver than me. Living every day in  the  presence  of  those  who  refuse  to  acknowledge  your  humanity  takes great courage.” 

Noa chewed on his lower lip and didn’t say anything. He wiped his nose with his hand. 

“My child,” he said, and Isak let go of his son’s hand. “My dear boy. My blessing.” 

6

December 1944

Like  most  shops  in  Osaka  with  nothing  to  sell,  the  restaurant  was shuttered frequently, but its three remaining workers showed up six days a week. Food had virtually disappeared from the markets, and even when the rations  arrived  and  the  shops  opened  for  half  a  day  to  long  lines,  the offerings  were  unacceptably  sparse  and  undesirable.  You  could  wait  six hours for fish and come home with a scant handful of dried anchovies, or worse,  nothing  at  all.  If  you  had  high-level  military  connections,  it  was possible to obtain some of what you needed; of course, if you had a great deal of money, there was always the black market. City children were sent alone  to  the  country  by  train  to  buy  an  egg  or  a  potato  in  exchange  for  a grandmother’s kimono. At the restaurant, Kim Changho, who was in charge of  procuring  food,  kept  two  storage  bins:  one,  which  could  be  safely inspected  by  the  neighborhood  association  leaders,  who  liked  to  make surprise visits to restaurant kitchens, and another, behind a false wall in the basement, for food bought from the black market. Sometimes, customers—

usually  wealthy  businessmen  from  Osaka  and  travelers  from  abroad—

brought their own meat and alcohol to the restaurant. The men who used to cook in the evening were gone now; Kim made up the whole of the evening staff;  it  was  up  to  him  to  cook  the  meats  and  wash  the  dishes  for  the occasional customer. 

  

It was the twelfth month of the year—a mild, wintry morning. When Sunja and Kyunghee arrived for work, Kim asked the women to have a seat at the square table pushed up against the wall outside the kitchen. This was where they usually took their meals and breaks. He’d already placed a pot of tea on the table. Once seated, Kyunghee poured each of them a cup. 

“The restaurant will be closed tomorrow,” Kim said. 

“For how long?” Sunja asked. 

“Till the war is over. This morning, I gave up the last of the metal things. 

The kitchen’s almost empty now. All the steel rice bowls, basins, cooking pots, utensils, steel chopsticks were requisitioned. Even if I could find new ones and remain open, the police will know that we’ve kept things back and confiscate  them.  The  government  doesn’t  pay  us  for  what  they  take.  We can’t keep replacing—” Kim took a sip of his tea. “Well, so it has to be.” 

Sunja  nodded,  feeling  bad  for  Kim,  who  looked  upset.  He  glanced briefly at Kyunghee. 

“And what will you do?” Kyunghee asked him. 

Kim, younger than Isak, addressed her as Sister. Lately, he depended on her  to  accompany  him  to  the  market  to  support  his  civilian  status  when stopped.  Suspicious  of  military  service  dodgers,  the  police  and neighborhood  association  leaders  routinely  questioned  any  male  not  in uniform. To put them off, he’d taken to wearing the dark glasses of a blind man on the streets. 

“Can you find another job?” Kyunghee asked. 

“Don’t  worry  about  me.  At  least  I  don’t  have  to  fight”—he  laughed, touching  his  eyeglasses;  his  poor  vision  had  kept  him  from  fighting  and from  working  in  the  mines  when  other  Koreans  had  been  conscripted

—“which is good, since I’m a coward.” 

Kyunghee shook her head. 

Kim stood up. 

“We  have  some  customers  coming  this  evening  from  Hokkaido.  I  kept back  two  cooking  pans  and  a  few  bowls  for  the  meal;  we  can  use  those. 

Sister, I wonder if you can come with me to the market,” he said, then he turned to Sunja. “Will you stay here and wait for the liquor man to come? 

He’s supposed to bring a package by. Oh, the customer has asked for your

bellflower   muchim  for  tonight.  I  left  a  packet  of  dried  bellflowers  in  the downstairs cupboard. You’ll find the other ingredients there.” 

Sunja nodded, wondering how he’d found dried bellflowers and sesame oil. 

Kyunghee  got  up  and  put  on  her  old  blue  coat  over  her  sweater  and worker pants. She was still a lovely woman, clear skinned and slender, but now,  fine  crinkles  around  her  eyes  and  marionette  lines  by  her  mouth appeared when she smiled. Heavy kitchen work had ruined her once-supple white  hands,  but  she  did  not  mind.  Yoseb,  who  held  her  small  right  hand when they slept, didn’t seem to notice the red scaly patches on her palms resulting from day after day of pickling. After Isak died, Yoseb had become a  different  man—sullen,  brooding,  and  uninterested  in  anything  but  work. 

His change had transformed their household and their marriage. Kyunghee tried to cheer up her husband, but she could do little to dispel his gloom and silence.  At  home,  no  one  seemed  to  talk  except  for  the  boys.  Yoseb  was almost unrecognizable from the boy she had loved from girlhood. He had become  this  cynical,  broken  man—something  she  could  never  have predicted.  So  it  was  only  at  the  restaurant  that  Kyunghee  behaved  like herself. Here, she teased Kim like a younger brother and giggled with Sunja while they cooked. Now, even this place would be gone. 

After Kim and her sister-in-law left for the market, Sunja shut the door behind them. As she turned toward the kitchen, she heard the knock. 

“Did you forget something?” Sunja asked, opening the door. 

Hansu stood before her, wearing a black coat over a gray wool suit. His hair  was  still  dark  and  his  face  more  or  less  the  same,  with  a  slight thickening  along  his  jawline.  Reflexively,  Sunja  checked  to  see  if  he  was wearing the white leather shoes he used to wear long ago. He wore black leather lace-up shoes. 

“It’s been a long time,” Hansu said calmly, entering the restaurant. Sunja stepped several paces away from him. 

“What are you doing here?” 

“This is my restaurant. Kim Changho works for me.” 

Her  head  felt  foggy,  and  Sunja  slumped  down  on  the  nearest  seat cushion. 

Hansu  had  located  her  eleven  years  ago  when  she’d  pawned  the  silver pocket  watch  he’d  given  her.  The  pawnbroker  had  tried  to  sell  him  that watch, and the rest had been simple detective work. Since then, Hansu had been  tracking  her  daily.  After  Isak  went  to  prison,  he  knew  she  needed money  and  created  this  job  for  her.  Sunja  learned  that  the  moneylender who’d  loaned  Yoseb  the  money  worked  for  him  as  well.  In  fact,  Hansu’s wife  was  the  eldest  daughter  of  a  powerful  Japanese  moneylender  in Kansai,  and  Hansu  had  been  legally  adopted  by  his  father-in-law, Morimoto,  because  the  man  did  not  have  a  son.  Koh  Hansu,  whose  legal name  was  Haru  Morimoto,  lived  in  an  enormous  house  outside  of  Osaka with his wife and three daughters. 

Hansu led her back to the table where she’d sat only a few moments ago with Kim and Kyunghee. 

“Let’s  have  some  tea.  You  stay  here,  and  I’ll  get  a  cup.  You  seem troubled by my appearance.” 

Familiar  with  where  everything  was,  Hansu  returned  from  the  kitchen right away with a teacup. 

Sunja stared at him, still unable to speak. 

“Noa is a very smart boy,” he said proudly. “He’s a handsome child and an excellent runner.” 

She  tried  not  to  look  afraid.  How  did  he  know  these  things?  She  now recalled every conversation she’d ever had with Kim about her sons. There had been numerous occasions when Noa and Mozasu had been with her at the restaurant when there’d been no school for Noa. 

“What do you want?” she asked finally, trying to appear calmer than she felt. 

“You  have  to  leave  Osaka  immediately.  Convince  your  sister  and  your brother-in-law to go. For the safety of the children. However, if they don’t want to go, there’s little you can do. I have a place for you and the boys.” 

“Why?” 

“Because the real bombing will start soon here.” 

“What are you talking about?” 

“The Americans are going to bomb Osaka in a matter of days. The B-29s have  been  in  China.  Now  they  found  more  bases  on  the  islands.  The Japanese  are  losing  the  war.  The  government  knows  it  can  never  win  but won’t  admit  it.  The  Americans  know  that  the  Japanese  military  has  to  be

stopped.  The  Japanese  military  would  kill  every  Japanese  boy  rather  than admit its error. Fortunately, the war will end before Noa is recruited.” 

“But everyone says Japan is doing better.” 

“You  mustn’t  believe  what  you  hear  from  the  neighbors  or  what  the newspapers say. They don’t know.” 

“Shhh—”  Sunja  looked  around  instinctively  at  the  plate  glass  window and the front door. If anyone was caught saying such treacherous things, he could  be  sent  to  jail.  She  had  repeatedly  told  her  boys  to  never,  ever  say anything negative about Japan or the war. “You shouldn’t talk like this. You could get in trouble—” 

“No one can hear us.” 

She bit her lower lip and stared, still unable to believe the sight of him. It had been twelve years. Yet here was the same face—the one she had loved so much. She had loved his face the way she had loved the brightness of the moon and the cold blue water of the sea. Hansu was sitting across from her, and  he  returned  her  gaze,  looking  kindly  at  her.  However,  he  remained composed,  certain  of  every  measured  word  he  uttered.  There  had  never been any hesitation in him. He was unlike her father, Isak, her brother-in-law, or Kim. He was unlike any other man she had ever known. 

“Sunja-ya, you have to leave Osaka. There’s no time to think about it. I came here to tell you this, because the bombs will destroy this city.” 

Why  had  he  not  come  sooner?  Why  had  he  kept  back  like  a  watchful shadow over her life? How many times had he seen her when she had not seen him? 

The  anger  she  felt  toward  him  surprised  her.  “They  won’t  leave,  and  I can’t just—” 

“You mean your brother-in-law. He might be a fool, but that’s not your problem. The sister-in-law will go if you tell her. This city is made of wood and paper. It’ll take no more than a match for it to incinerate. Imagine what will happen with an American bomb.” He paused. “Your sons will be killed. 

Is  that  what  you  want?  I’ve  already  sent  my  daughters  away  a  long  time ago. A parent must be decisive; a child cannot protect himself.” 

She understood then. Hansu was worried about Noa. He had a Japanese wife and three daughters. He had no son. 

“How do you know? How do you know what will happen?” 

“How  did  I  know  that  you  needed  work?  How  did  I  know  where  Noa

goes  to  school,  that  his  math  teacher  is  a  Korean  who  pretends  to  be Japanese,  that  your  husband  died  because  he  didn’t  get  out  of  prison  in time, and that you’re alone in this world. How did I know how to keep my family safe? It’s my job to know what others don’t. How did you know to make  kimchi  and  sell  it  on  a  street  corner  to  earn  money?  You  knew because you wanted to live. I want to live, too, and if I want to live, I have to know things others don’t. Now, I’m telling you something valuable. I’m telling  you  something  so  you  can  save  your  sons’  lives.  Don’t  waste  this information. The world can go to hell, but you need to protect your sons.” 

“My brother-in-law will not abandon his house.” 

He  laughed.  “The  house  will  be  a  pile  of  ashes.  The  Japanese  will  not give him a sen for his pain when it’s gone.” 

“The neighbors said that the war will end soon.” 

“The  war  will  end  soon,  but  not  the  way  they  think.  The  wealthy Japanese  have  already  sent  their  families  to  the  country.  They’ve  already converted their cash into gold. The rich do not care about politics; they will say anything to save their skin. You’re not rich, but you’re smart, and I’m telling you that you have to leave today.” 

“How?” 

“Kim will take you, your brother-in-law and sister-in-law, and the boys to a farm outside Osaka prefecture. A sweet-potato farmer owes me a favor. 

He has a big place, and there’ll be plenty of food there. All of you will have to work for him until the war’s over, but you’ll have a place to sleep and more  than  enough  to  eat.  Tamaguchi-san  has  no  children;  he  won’t  harm you.” 

“Why did you come?” Sunja began to cry. 

“It’s  not  the  time  to  discuss  this.  Please  don’t  be  a  foolish  woman. 

You’re  smarter  than  that.  It’s  time  to  take  action.  The  restaurant  will  be destroyed no different than your house will be,” he said, speaking quickly. 

“This  building  is  made  of  wood  and  a  few  bricks.  Your  brother-in-law should  sell  his  house  immediately  to  the  next  idiot  and  get  out.  Or  at  the very least, he should take his ownership papers with him. Soon, people will be fleeing here like rats, so you have to leave now before it’s too late. The Americans  will  finish  this  stupid  war.  Maybe  tonight,  maybe  in  a  few weeks, but they’re not going to put up with this nonsense war for very long. 

The Germans are losing, too.” 

Sunja folded her hands together. The war had been going on for so long. 

Everyone  was  sick  of  it.  Without  the  restaurant,  the  family  would  have starved  even  though  everyone  was  working  and  earning  money.  Their clothes  were  threadbare  and  holey.  Cloth,  thread,  and  needles  were unavailable. How were Hansu’s shoes so shiny when no one had any shoe polish? She and Kyunghee loathed the neighborhood association’s endless meetings, yet if they didn’t go, the leaders would take it out on their rations. 

The  latest  military  drills  had  become  ludicrous—on  Sunday  mornings, grandmothers  and  little  children  were  required  to  practice  spearing  the enemy with sharpened bamboo spears. They said American soldiers raped women  and  girls  and  that  it  would  be  better  to  kill  yourself  than  to surrender  to  such  barbarians.  Back  in  the  restaurant  office,  there  was  a cache  of  bamboo  spears  for  the  workers  and  the  customers  in  case  the Americans landed. Kim kept two hunting knives in his desk drawer. 

“Can I go back home? To Busan?” 

“There’s nothing to eat there, and it isn’t safe for you. Women are being taken away from smaller villages in greater numbers.” 

Sunja looked puzzled. 

“I’ve told you this before: Never listen to anyone who tells you there’s good factory work in China or any of the other colonies. Those jobs don’t exist. Do you understand me?” His expression grew severe. 

“Is my mother all right?” 

“She’s not young so they won’t take her. I’ll try to find out.” 

“Thank you,” she said quietly. 

Worried  about  her  boys,  Sunja  hadn’t  paid  enough  attention  to  her mother’s  welfare.  In  Yangjin’s  sparse  letters,  written  for  her  by  a  harried schoolteacher,  she’d  say  that  she  was  fine,  expressing  more  concern  for Sunja  and  the  boys  than  for  herself.  Sunja  hadn’t  seen  her  mother  in  as many years as she had not seen Hansu. 

“Can you be ready to go tonight?” 

“Why would my brother-in-law listen to me? How can I possibly explain

—” 

“Tell him that Kim told you that you must leave today. He’s talking to your sister-in-law now. Tell him that he learned this privileged information from his boss. I can send Kim to speak to him at your house.” 

Sunja said nothing. She didn’t believe that anyone could convince Yoseb

to leave. 

“There should be no hesitation. The boys have to be protected.” 

“But Sister will—” 

“So what about her? Listen to me. Choose your sons over everyone else. 

Don’t you know this by now?” 

She nodded. 

“Bring everyone here at dusk. Kim will keep the restaurant open. No one should  know  where  you’re  going.  You  want  to  get  out  of  here  before everyone  else  tries  to  as  well.”  Hansu  got  up  and  looked  at  her  soberly. 

“Leave the others if you have to.” 

7

1945

On the day that Hansu told her to take the boys to the country, Yoseb got a job offer. Earlier that afternoon, a friend of a friend had stopped by Yoseb’s biscuit  factory  and  told  him  of  the  position:  A  steel  factory  in  Nagasaki needed a foreman to manage its Korean workers. There would be a housing camp  for  men,  including  room  and  board,  but  Yoseb  couldn’t  bring  his family. The pay was almost triple his current salary. The family would be separated  for  a  while.  When  Yoseb  came  home,  excited  about  the  offer, Kyunghee  and  Sunja  had  news  of  their  own.  Hansu’s  hand  was  in everything, but what could Sunja say? 

At  dusk,  Kim  moved  the  women  and  boys  to  Tamaguchi’s  farm.  The next morning, Yoseb quit his job at the factory, packed one bag, and locked up the house. That afternoon, Yoseb headed to Nagasaki, recalling the time he  left  Pyongyang  for  Osaka—the  last  time  he’d  left  on  a  journey  by himself. 

Short months passed before the bombings started, but once they began, the  bombing  continued  through  the  summer.  Hansu  was  wrong  about  the timing, but he was right that the neighborhood would turn to ashes. 

Tamaguchi,  a  fifty-eight-year-old  sweet-potato  farmer,  did  not  mind having the extra pairs of hands. His regular workers and seasonal ones had been conscripted years ago, and there were no able-bodied men to replace them.  Several  of  his  former  workers  had  already  died  in  Manchuria,  with

two  badly  disabled  in  battle,  and  there  had  been  scant  news  of  the  others sent  to  Singapore  and  the  Philippines.  Each  morning,  as  Tamaguchi  rose from his futon, he suffered from the routine aches that accompanied aging; however,  he  was  relieved  to  be  old,  since  he  would  not  have  to  fight  the stupid  war.  The  shortage  of  men  impaired  his  ambitions  for  his  farm, especially  at  a  time  when  there  was  a  growing  demand  for  potatoes. 

Tamaguchi could command any illegal price he wanted, it seemed, and now that he had tasted wealth, so much so that he’d been forced to hide troves of treasure in various parts of the farm, he was willing to do whatever it took to squeeze every golden drop from this national calamity. 

Night and day, Tamaguchi cultivated potato slips, turned the earth, and planted.  Without  men,  it  was  nearly  impossible  to  complete  the  endless chores of the farm, and without men, there was no one to marry his wife’s two sisters, whom he’d been forced to take in—worthless city girls not built for any kind of work. With their chatter and made-up ailments, the sisters distracted  his  wife  from  her  labors,  and  he  hoped  he  wouldn’t  be  saddled with  them  for  much  longer.  Thankfully,  his  wife’s  parents  were  dead.  For seasonal work, Tamaguchi had been hiring the elderly men and women in the village, but they were given to endless whining about the difficult nature of planting in the warm weather and harvesting in the cold. 

It  would  never  have  occurred  to  Tamaguchi  to  hire  city  Koreans  or  to board them on his farm when he’d turned away many city Japanese who’d sought refuge, but Koh Hansu he could not refuse. 

Upon  the  receipt  of  Hansu’s  telegram,  the  farmer  and  his  overworked wife, Kyoko, configured the barn to make it habitable for the Korean family from Osaka. Only days after their arrival, however, Tamaguchi learned that it was he who’d gotten the better end of the bargain. Hansu had furnished him with two strong women who could cook, clean, and plow; a young man who couldn’t see well but could dig and lift; and two clever boys who took instruction perfectly. The Koreans ate plenty, but they earned their keep and bothered no one. They didn’t ever complain. 

From the first day, Tamaguchi put Noa and Mozasu in charge of feeding the three cows, eight pigs, and thirty chickens; milking the cows; collecting the eggs; and cleaning the henhouse. The boys spoke Japanese like natives, so  he  was  able  to  take  them  to  the  market  to  help  sell;  the  older  one  was excellent with calculations, and his letters were neat enough for the ledger. 

The two Korean women, sisters-in-law, were fine housekeepers and hardy outdoor  workers.  The  skinny  married  one  was  not  young  but  very  pretty, and her Japanese was good enough that Kyoko tasked her with the cooking, washing, and mending. The shorter one, the quiet widow, tended the kitchen garden  ably  and  worked  in  the  fields  alongside  the  young  man.  The  two labored  like  a  pair  of  oxen.  For  the  first  time  in  years,  Tamaguchi  felt relaxed; even his wife was less irritable, scolding him and her sisters less than usual. 

Four  months  after  their  arrival,  Hansu’s  truck  drove  up  to  the  farm  at dusk. Hansu stepped out of the truck, and he had with him an older Korean woman. Tamaguchi rushed to meet him. Normally, Hansu’s men came by in the evenings to pick up the produce for sale in the city, but it was rarely the boss himself. 

“Tamaguchi-san.”  Hansu  bowed.  The  old  woman  bowed  to  Tamaguchi from the waist. She wore a traditional dress and in each hand she clutched fabric parcels. 

“Koh-san.” Tamaguchi bowed, smiling at the older woman. As he drew closer, Tamaguchi could see that the woman was not very old; in fact, she might  have  been  younger  than  he  was.  Her  brown  face  was  drawn  and malnourished. 

“This  is  Sunja’s  mother.  Kim  Yangjin   desu,”  Hansu  said.  “She  arrived from Busan earlier today.” 

“Kim-u  Yangjin-san.”  The  farmer  said  each  syllable  slowly,  realizing that  he  had  a  new  guest.  He  scanned  her  face,  searching  for  any resemblance to the young widow, mother to the two boys. There was some similarity  around  the  mouth  and  jaw.  The  woman’s  brown  hands  were strong  like  a  man’s,  with  large  knobbed  fingers.  She  would  make  a  good worker,  he  thought.  “Sunja’s  mother?  Is  that  so?  Welcome,  welcome,”  he said, smiling. 

Yangjin, her eyes downcast, appeared afraid. She was also exhausted. 

Hansu cleared his throat. 

“And how are the boys? I hope they’re not giving you any trouble.” 

“No,  no.  Not  at  all.  They’re  excellent  workers!  Wonderful  boys.” 

Tamaguchi meant this. He had not expected the boys to be so capable. With no children of his own, he had expected city children to be spoiled and lazy like his sisters-in-law. In his village, prosperous farmers complained about

their foolish sons, so the childless Tamaguchi and his wife had not envied parents very much. Also, Tamaguchi hadn’t had any idea of what Koreans would  be  like.  He  was  not  a  bigoted  man,  but  the  only  Korean  he  knew personally was Koh Hansu, and their relationship had begun with the war and  was  not  an  ordinary  one.  An  open  secret,  several  of  the  larger  farms sold their produce on the city’s black markets through Koh Hansu and his distribution  network,  but  no  one  discussed  this.  Foreigners  and  yakuza controlled the black market, and there were serious repercussions for selling produce  to  them.  It  was  an  honor  to  help  Koh  Hansu;  favors  created obligations, and the farmer was determined to do anything he could for him. 

“Koh-san, please come inside the house for tea. You must be thirsty. It is very hot today.” Tamaguchi walked into the house, and even before taking off his own shoes, the farmer offered house slippers to his guests. 

Shaded  by  ancient,  sturdy  poplars,  the  interior  of  the  large  farmhouse was pleasantly cool. The fresh grass smell of new tatami mats greeted the guests. In the main room, paneled in cedar, Tamaguchi’s wife, Kyoko, sat on  a  blue  silk  floor  cushion,  sewing  her  husband’s  shirt;  her  two  sisters, lying  on  their  stomachs  with  their  ankles  crossed,  flipped  through  an  old movie magazine they’d read so many times before that they’d memorized its  text.  The  three  women,  exceptionally  well  dressed  for  no  one  in particular,  looked  out  of  place  in  the  farmhouse.  Despite  the  rationing  of cloth,  the  farmer’s  wife  and  her  sisters  had  not  suffered  any  privation. 

Kyoko wore an elegant cotton kimono, more suited for a Tokyo merchant’s wife, and the sisters wore smart navy skirts and cotton blouses, looking like college co-eds from American films. 

When the sisters lifted their chins to see who’d walked into the house, their  pale,  pretty  faces  emerged  from  the  long  bangs  of  their  stylishly bobbed haircuts. The war had brought priceless treasures to the Tamaguchi home—valuable calligraphy scrolls, bolts of fabric, more kimonos than the women  could  ever  wear,  lacquered  cupboards,  jewels,  and  dishes—

possessions  of  city  dwellers  who’d  been  willing  to  trade  heirlooms  for  a sack  of  potatoes  and  a  chicken.  However,  the  sisters  yearned  for  the  city itself—new  films,  Kansai  shops,  the  unblinking  electric  lights.  They  were sick of the war, the endless green fields, and farm life in general. Bellies full and  well  housed,  they  had  only  contempt  for  the  smell  of  lamp  oil,  loud animals,  and  their  hick  brother-in-law,  who  was  always  talking  about  the

prices  of  things.  The  American  bombs  had  burned  down  the  cinemas, department stores, and their beloved confectioneries, but glittering images of  such  urban  pleasures  called  to  them  still,  feeding  their  growing discontent.  They  complained  daily  to  their  elder  sister—the  plain  and sacrificial  one—whom  they  had  once  mocked  for  marrying  their  distant country cousin, who now prepared gold and kimonos for their dowries. 

When  Tamaguchi  cleared  his  throat,  the  girls  sat  up  and  tried  to  look busy.  They  nodded  at  Hansu  and  stared  at  the  filthy  hem  of  the  Korean woman’s long skirt, unable to keep from making a face. 

Yangjin bowed deeply to the three women and remained by the door, not expecting to be invited in, and she was not. From where she stood, Yangjin could see a portion of the bent back of a woman working in the kitchen, but it didn’t look like Sunja. 

Hansu spotted the woman in the kitchen as well and asked Tamaguchi’s wife, “Is that Sunja-san in the kitchen?” 

Kyoko  bowed  to  him  again.  The  Korean  seemed  too  confident  for  her taste, but she recognized that her husband needed the fellow more than ever. 

“Koh-san, welcome. It’s so nice to see you,” Kyoko said, rising from her seat; she gave her sisters a reproving look, which stirred them sufficiently to stand up and bow to the guest. “The woman in the kitchen is Kyunghee-san. 

Sunja-san  is  planting  in  the  fields.  Please,  sit  down.  We  shall  get  you something cool to drink.” She turned to Ume-chan, the younger of the two sisters, and Ume trudged to the kitchen to fetch cold oolong- cha. 

Hansu nodded, trying not to show his irritation. He’d expected Sunja to work, but it hadn’t occurred to him that she’d be doing outdoor labor. 

Kyoko sensed the man’s displeasure. “Surely, you must want to see your daughter, ma’am. Tako-chan, please accompany our guest to her daughter.” 

Tako,  the  middle  of  the  three  sisters,  complied  because  she  had  no choice; it was pointless to defy Kyoko, who could hold a grudge for days in punitive silence. Hansu told Yangjin in Korean to follow the girl who’d take her to Sunja. As Tako put on her shoes in the stone-paved foyer, she caught a whiff of the old woman’s sour, peculiar odor, only aggravated by two days of travel. Filthy, she thought. Tako walked briskly ahead of her, keeping as many paces between them as she could. 

After  Kyoko  poured  the  tea  that  Ume  had  brought  from  the  kitchen,  the women disappeared, leaving the men to speak alone in the living room. 

The farmer asked Hansu for news of the war. 

“It  can’t  last  much  longer.  The  Germans  are  being  crushed,  and  the Americans are just getting started. Japan will lose this war. It’s a matter of when.” Hansu said this without a trace of regret or joy. “It’s better to stop this madness sooner than later than to have more nice boys get killed, is it not?” 

“Yes,  yes.  That  is  so,  isn’t  it?”  Tamaguchi  replied  in  a  whisper, dispirited. Of course, he wanted Japan to win, and no doubt Hansu knew the realities, but even if Japan would not win, the farmer had no wish for the war to end just yet. There had been talk of fermenting sweet potatoes into airplane fuel; if that happened, and even if the government paid only a little

—if anything at all—the farmer expected prices to rise even higher on the black market, because the cities were desperate for food and alcohol. With just one or two more harvests, Tamaguchi would have enough gold to buy the  two  vast  tracts  of  land  beside  his.  The  owner  of  the  plots  was  only getting older and less interested in working. To own the entire south side of the region in one unbroken lot had been his grandfather’s dearest wish. 

Hansu interrupted the farmer’s reverie. 

“So, how is it? Having them here?” 

Tamaguchi nodded favorably. “They help a great deal. I wish they didn’t have to work so much, but, as you know, I’m short on men—” 

“They’d expected to work.” Hansu nodded reassuringly, fully cognizant that  the  farmer  was  getting  back  his  room  and  board  and  making  a  large profit, but this was okay with him as long as Sunja and her family weren’t being mistreated. 

“Will  you  stay  with  us  tonight?”  Tamaguchi  asked.  “It’s  too  late  to travel, and you must have dinner with us. Kyunghee-san is an exceptional cook.” 

Tako  didn’t  have  to  walk  the  old  woman  far.  When  Yangjin  spotted  her daughter  bent  over  in  the  vast,  dark  field,  she  grabbed  the  tail  end  of  her long skirt and wound it around her body to free her legs. She ran as fast as

she could in the direction of her daughter. 

Sunja,  who  heard  the  rushed  footfalls,  looked  up  from  her  planting.  A tiny  woman  in  an  off-white-colored   hanbok  was  running  toward  her,  and Sunja dropped her hoe. The small shoulders, the gray bun gathered at the base  of  the  neck,  the  bow  of  the  short  blouse  knotted  neatly  in  a  soft rectangle:  Umma. How was that possible? Sunja trampled the potato slips in her path to get to her. 

“Oh, my child. My child. Oh, my child.” 

Sunja  held  her  mother  close,  able  to  feel  the  sharpness  of  Yangjin’s collarbone beneath the blouse fabric. Her mother had shrunk. 

Hansu ate his dinner quickly, then went to the barn to speak with the others. 

He  wanted  merely  to  sit  with  them,  not  to  have  them  fuss  over  him.  He would have preferred to eat with Sunja and her family, but he didn’t want to offend Tamaguchi. During the meal, he had thought only of her and the boy. 

They had never shared a meal. It was hard to explain, even to himself, his yearning to be with them. In the barn, he realized that Kyunghee had made two dinners in the Tamaguchi kitchen—a Japanese one for the Tamaguchi family and a Korean for the others. In the barn, the Koreans ate their meals on a low, oilcloth-covered table that Kim had built for them with leftover beams. Sunja had just cleared the dinner dishes. Everyone looked up when he walked in. 

The animals were quieter in the evening, but they were not silent. The smells were stronger than Hansu remembered, but he knew the odor would be less noticeable soon enough. The Koreans were housed in the back part of the barn, and the animals were nearer the front, with haystacks between them. Kim had built a wooden partition, and he and the boys slept on one side with the women on the other. 

Yangjin, who’d been sitting on the ground between her grandsons, got up and  bowed  to  him.  On  the  way  to  the  farm,  she’d  thanked  him  numerous times,  and  now,  reunited  with  her  family,  she  kept  repeating  thank  you, thank  you,  clutching  on  to  her  grandsons,  who  looked  embarrassed.  She bawled like an old Korean woman. 

Kyunghee was still in the farmhouse kitchen, washing the dinner dishes. 

When she finished with that, she would prepare the guest room for Hansu. 

Kim was in the shed behind the barn that was used for bathing, busy heating water  for  everyone’s  bath.  Kyunghee  and  Kim  had  taken  over  Sunja’s evening  chores  to  allow  her  to  remain  with  her  mother.  None  of  them suspected the reasons why Hansu had gone through the trouble of getting Yangjin from Korea. As Yangjin sobbed, Sunja observed Hansu, unable to make sense of this man who had never left her life. 

Hansu sat down on the thick pile of hay, opposite the boys. 

“Did you eat enough dinner?” Hansu asked them in plain Korean. 

The boys looked up, surprised that Hansu spoke Korean so well. They’d thought that the man who’d brought their grandmother might be Japanese, because he was so well dressed and since Tamaguchi-san had treated him with such deference. 

“You  are  Noa,”  Hansu  said,  considering  the  boy’s  face  carefully.  “You are twelve years old.” 

“Yes,  sir,”  Noa  replied.  The  man  wore  very  fine  clothes  and  beautiful leather  shoes.  He  looked  like  a  judge  or  an  important  person  in  a  movie poster. 

“How do you like being on the farm?” 

“It is good, sir.” 

“I’m almost six years old,” Mozasu interrupted, something he did out of habit whenever his older brother spoke. “We eat a lot of rice here. I can eat bowls and bowls of rice. Tamaguchi-san said that I need to eat well to grow. 

He told me not to eat potatoes but to eat rice! Do you like rice, sir?” the boy asked  Hansu.  “Noa  and  I  will  have  baths  tonight.  In  Osaka,  we  couldn’t take baths often because there was no fuel for hot water. I like the baths on the farm better because the tub is smaller than the one at the  sento. Do you like baths? The water is so hot, but you get used it,  nee, and the tips of my fingers get wrinkled like an old man when I don’t come out of the water.” 

Mozasu opened his eyes wide. “My face doesn’t wrinkle, though, because I am young.” 

Hansu  laughed.  The  younger  child  had  none  of  Noa’s  formality.  He seemed so free. 

“I’m glad you’re eating well here. That’s good to know. Tamaguchi-san said that you boys are excellent workers.” 

“Thank you, sir,” Mozasu said, wanting to ask the man more questions

but stopping himself when the man addressed his brother. 

“What are your chores, Noa?” 

“We clean the stalls here, feed the animals, and take care of the chickens. 

I also keep records for Tamaguchi-san when we go to the market.” 

“Do you miss school?” 

Noa did not reply. He missed doing math problems and writing Japanese. 

He missed the quiet of doing his work—how no one bothered him when he was doing his homework. There was never any time to read at the farm, and he had no books of his own. 

“I was told that you’re a very good student.” 

“Last year, there wasn’t much school.” 

Back home, school had been canceled often. Unlike the other boys, Noa had disliked the bayonet practices and pointless air raid drills. Although he had not wanted to be separated from Uncle Yoseb, the farm was better than being in the city, because he felt safe here. At the farm, he never heard any planes, and there were far fewer bomb shelter drills. Meals were abundant and  delicious.  They  ate  eggs  every  day  and  drank  fresh  milk.  He  slept deeply and woke up feeling well. 

“When  the  war  ends,  you  will  return  to  school,  I  suppose.  Would  you like that?” Hansu asked. 

Noa nodded. 

Sunja  wondered  how  they  would  manage  then.  After  the  war,  she  had planned on going back to Yeongdo, but her mother said there was nothing left. The government had assessed taxes on the boardinghouse owner, and the owner had sold the building to a Japanese family. The servant girls had taken  factory  jobs  in  Manchuria,  and  there  had  been  no  news  of  them. 

When Hansu had located Yangjin, she had been working as a housekeeper for a Japanese merchant in Busan, sleeping in the storeroom. 

Hansu pulled out two comic books from his jacket pocket. 

“Here.” 

Noa accepted them with both hands, the way his mother had taught him. 

The writing was in Korean. 

“Thank you, sir.” 

“Do you read Korean?” 

“No, sir.” 

“You can learn,” Hansu said. 

“Aunt Kyunghee can help us read this,” Mozasu said. “Uncle Yoseb isn’t here, but when we see him next time, we can surprise him.” 

“You boys should know how to read Korean. One day, you may return,” 

Hansu said. 

“Yes, sir,” Noa said. He imagined that Korea would be a peaceful place where he would be normal. His father had told him that Pyongyang, where he’d grown up, was a beautiful city, and Yeongdo, his mother’s hometown, was a serene island with abundant fish in blue-green waters. 

“Where are you from, sir?” Noa asked. 

“Jeju. It isn’t far from Busan, where your mother is from. It’s a volcanic island. They have oranges there. The people from Jeju are descendants of gods.” He winked. “I will take you there one day.” 

“I don’t want to live in Korea,” Mozasu cried. “I want to stay here at the farm.” 

Sunja patted Mozasu’s back. 

“Umma, we should live on the farm forever. Uncle Yoseb will come here soon, right?” Mozasu asked. 

Kyunghee walked in then, having finished her work. Mozasu ran to her with the comic books. 

“Can you read this for me?” 

Mozasu led her to the pile of folded futons, which they used as chairs. 

Kyunghee nodded. 

“Noa, come. I’ll read these to you boys.” 

Noa bowed quickly to Hansu and joined Kyunghee and Mozasu. Yangjin followed  Noa,  leaving  Sunja  at  the  table.  When  Sunja  started  to  get  up, Hansu gestured for her to sit down. 

“Stay.”  Hansu  looked  serious.  “Stay  for  a  little  while.  I  want  to  know how you are.” 

“I’m well. Thank you.” Her voice was shaky. “Thank you for bringing my mother here,” Sunja said. There was more she needed to say, but it was hard. 

“You asked for news of her, and I thought it would be better for her to come here. It’s very bad in Japan, but it’s worse in Korea right now. When the war ends, it may get better, but it’ll be worse before it stabilizes.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“When  the  Americans  win,  we  don’t  know  what  the  Japanese  will  do. 

They’ll  pull  out  of  Korea,  but  who’ll  be  in  charge  of  Korea?  What  will happen  to  all  those  Koreans  who  supported  the  Japanese?  There  will  be confusion. There will be more bloodshed. You don’t want to be around it. 

You don’t want your sons around it.” 

“What will you do?” she asked. 

He looked directly at her. 

“I’ll take care of myself and my people. You think I’d trust my life to a bunch of politicians? The people in charge don’t know anything. And the ones who do don’t care.” 

Sunja  thought  about  this.  Perhaps  that  was  right,  but  why  should  she trust  him?  She  pushed  herself  off  the  ground  with  her  hands,  but  Hansu shook his head. 

“Is it so difficult to talk with me? Please sit.” 

Sunja sat down. 

“I have to take care of my sons. You should understand that.” 

The boys were staring intently at the comic book pages. Kyunghee was reading the lines with feeling, and even Yangjin, who was unable to read, found  herself  laughing  with  the  children  at  the  silly  things  the  characters were saying. They were absorbed in the comic book, and their faces seemed softer somehow, like they were calm. 

“I’ll help you,” Hansu said. “You don’t have to worry about money or

—” 

“You’re helping us now because I have no choice. When the war ends, I’ll work to take care of them. I’m working now to earn our keep—” 

“When the war ends, I can find you a home and give you money to take care of the boys. The boys should be going to school, not pushing cow dung around. Your mother and sister-in-law can stay, too. I can get your brother-in-law a good job.” 

“I  can’t  explain  you  to  my  family,”  Sunja  said.  She  felt  like  she  was lying all the time. What was he thinking? she wondered. Surely, he could not  desire  her  anymore.  She  was  a  twenty-nine-year-old  widow  with  two young  children  to  feed  and  educate.  Sunja  was  not  old,  but  she  could  not imagine that any man would want her now. If she had never been beautiful before,  she  was  not  even  appealing  now.  She  was  a  plain  woman  with  a country face, her skin spotted and wrinkled by the sun. Her body was strong and  stout,  larger  than  when  she  had  been  a  girl.  In  her  life,  she’d  been

desired  by  two  men;  it  was  difficult  to  imagine  having  that  again. 

Sometimes,  she  felt  like  a  serviceable  farm  animal  who’d  one  day  be useless.  Before  that  day  arrived,  it  was  important  to  make  sure  her  boys would be okay when she was gone. 

“You have children, don’t you?” 

“Three daughters.” 

“And  what  would  your  daughters  say  about  me?  About  us?”  she whispered. 

“My family has nothing to do with you.” 

“I  understand.”  Sunja  swallowed,  her  mouth  dry.  “I’m  grateful  for  this opportunity—to  work  and  to  be  safe.  But  when  the  war  ends,  I’ll  get another  job  and  support  the  boys  and  my  mother.  I’ll  work  until  I  cannot work anymore.” 

Sunja got up from the floor and brushed the hay off her work pants. 

Unable to breathe normally, she turned from him and stared at the oxen

—their enormous dark eyes, full of eternal suffering. Had the others noticed them talking? They seemed to be focused on the comic book. Sunja covered her  left  hand  with  her  right;  despite  her  washing,  her  cuticles  were  still brown from the dirt. 

8

Again,  Hansu  was  not  wrong.  The  war  did  end,  faster  than  he  had predicted, but even he could not have imagined the final bombs. A bunker had shielded Yoseb from the worst, but when he finally climbed out to the street,  a  burning  wall  from  a  nearby  wooden  shed  struck  his  right  side, engulfing  him  in  orange-and-blue  flames.  Someone  he  knew  from  the factory  floor  put  out  the  fire,  and  Hansu’s  men  found  him  at  a  pathetic hospital in Nagasaki at last. 

It  was  a  starry  evening,  breathlessly  quiet  after  an  extended  season  of cicadas, when Hansu brought Yoseb to Tamaguchi’s farm on an American military  truck.  Mozasu  was  the  first  to  spot  the  truck,  and  the  small  and quick boy darted to the pig stalls to retrieve the bamboo spears. The family stood by the half-open barn door, observing the truck as it came closer. 

“Here,”  Mozasu  said,  handing  out  the  rattling,  hollow  spears  to  his mother,  grandmother,  brother,  and  aunt,  keeping  back  two.  Kim  Changho was having his bath. He whispered to his brother, “You have to get  ajeossi from the bath. Give him his weapon.” The child gave Noa a spear for Kim and kept one for himself. Mozasu clutched his spear tightly, preparing for attack.  Noa’s  holey  hand-me-down  sweater  hung  loosely  over  Mozasu’s flour-sack work pants. He was tall for a six-year-old. 

“The  war’s  over,”  Noa  reminded  Mozasu  firmly.  “It’s  probably  Hansu ajeossi’s men. Put that thing down before you hurt yourself.” 

The  truck  stopped,  and  two  Koreans  working  for  Hansu  brought  out  a stretcher carrying Yoseb, who was bandaged and deeply sedated. 

Kyunghee let go of the spear, letting it fall on the soft earth, and she put her hand on Mozasu’s shoulder to steady herself. 

Hansu  stepped  out  of  the  cab  of  the  truck  while  the  driver,  a  ginger-

haired  American  GI,  stayed  behind.  Mozasu  snuck  glances  at  the  soldier. 

The driver had light, freckled skin and pale, yellow-reddish hair like fire; he didn’t  look  mean,  and  Hansu   ajeossi  didn’t  look  afraid.  Back  in  Osaka, Haru-san, the leader of the neighborhood association, who was most often in charge of rations, had warned the neighborhood children that Americans kill  indiscriminately  so  everyone  must  flee  at  the  sight  of  any  American soldiers.  Death  at  your  own  hands  was  preferable  to  capture.  When  the driver  noticed  Mozasu  looking  at  him,  he  waved,  showing  his  straight, white teeth. 

Kyunghee approached the stretcher slowly. At the sight of his burns, she clasped her mouth with both her hands. Despite the terrifying news reports about the bombings, she had believed that Yoseb was alive, that he would not die without letting her know. She had prayed for him continually, and now he was home. She dropped to her knees and bowed her head. Everyone was silent until she rose. Even Kim was crying. 

Hansu  nodded  at  the  slight,  pretty  woman  who  was  weeping  and  gave her  a  large  parcel  wrapped  in  paper  and  a  military-sized  tub  of  burn liniment from America. 

“You’ll  find  some  medicine  in  there.  Mix  a  very  small  spoon  of  the powder with water or milk and give it to him at night so he can sleep. When it runs out, there’s no more, so you have to wean him off it little by little. 

He’ll beg you for more, but you have to tell him that you’re trying to make it last.” 

“What  is  it?”  she  asked.  Sunja  stood  by  her  sister-in-law  and  said nothing. 

“He needs it. For the pain, but it’s not good to keep taking it, because it’s addictive. Anyway, keep changing the bandages. They must be sterile. Boil the fabric before you use it. There’s more in there. He’ll need the liniment because his skin is getting tighter. Can you do this?” 

Kyunghee nodded, still staring at Yoseb. His mouth and cheek were half gone,  as  if  he  had  been  consumed  by  an  animal.  He  was  a  man  who  had done everything he could for his family—this had happened to him because he had gone to work. 

“Thank you, sir. Thank you for all that you’ve done for us,” Kyunghee said to Hansu, who shook his head and said nothing. He left them to speak to  the  farmer.  Kim,  who  had  returned  by  then,  having  finished  his  bath, 

followed Hansu as he walked to the farmer’s house. 

The  women  and  the  boys  led  the  men  carrying  the  stretcher  inside  the barn  and  made  a  place  for  him  in  an  empty  horse  stall.  Kyunghee  moved her pallet there. 

A short while later, Hansu and the men drove off without saying good-bye. 

The farmer didn’t complain about having one more Korean on his property, because  the  other  Koreans  did  Yoseb’s  share  of  the  work  as  well  as  their own;  harvest  season  was  approaching,  and  he  would  need  them.  Though none of them had mentioned it, Tamaguchi sensed that soon enough, they’d ask him for money to leave, and the farmer was determined to get as much work as he could out of them before they left for home. He had told them they were welcome to stay for as long as they liked, and the farmer meant this. Tamaguchi had been hiring returning veterans for small jobs, but they grumbled  about  the  dirtier  tasks  and  openly  refused  to  work  alongside foreigners. Even if he could replace all the Koreans with Japanese veterans, Tamaguchi needed Hansu to transport his sweet potatoes to the markets. All the Koreans could stay. 

The transport truck returned regularly, but Hansu didn’t come back for weeks.  Yoseb  suffered.  He  had  lost  the  hearing  in  his  right  ear.  He  was either shouting in anger or crying in agony. The medicine powder was now gone, and Yoseb wasn’t much better. In the evenings, he cried like a child, and there was little anyone could do. During the day, he tried to help out on the farm, repairing tools or attempting to sort the potatoes, but the pain was too  great  for  him  to  work.  Now  and  then,  Tamaguchi,  who  abhorred alcohol, gave him some holiday sake out of pity. However, when Kyunghee started to beg him each day for more, he told her that he couldn’t spare any, not because he was a stingy man, because Tamaguchi wasn’t, but because he had no intention of having a drunk on his property. 

A  month  later,  Hansu  returned.  The  afternoon  sun  had  dimmed  only  a little, and the workers had just returned to the fields after their midday meal to begin their second shift. In the cold barn, Yoseb was alone, lying down on his straw-filled pallet. 

Hearing the footfalls, Yoseb lifted his head, then laid it back down again on the straw pillow. 

Hansu placed two enormous crates in front of him, then sat down on the thick slab of wood by the pallet, which was being used as a bench. Despite his well-tailored suit and highly polished leather brogues, Hansu appeared at  ease  in  the  barn,  indifferent  to  the  harsh  smells  of  the  animals  and  the cold drafts. 

Yoseb said, “You’re the father of the boy, aren’t you?” 

Hansu studied the man’s scarred face, the ragged edges of a once-sloping jawline.  Yoseb’s  right  ear  was  now  a  tight  bud  of  a  flower,  folding  into itself. 

“That’s why you do all this,” Yoseb said. 

“Noa is my son,” Hansu said. 

“We owe you a debt—something we may never be able to repay.” 

Hansu raised his eyebrows but said nothing. It was always better to say less. 

“But you have no business being around him. My brother gave the child a name. He should never know anything else.” 

“I can give him a name, too.” 

“He has a name. It’s wrong to do this to the boy.” 

Yoseb  frowned;  the  smallest  movement  hurt.  Noa  had  his  younger brother’s mannerisms—from the way he spoke in Isak’s measured cadences to  the  way  he  ate  his  meals  in  modest  bites,  chewing  neatly.  He  behaved exactly like Isak. Whenever Noa had any time to spare, he would take his old  exercise  books  from  school  and  practice  writing,  though  no  one  told him to do so. Yoseb would never have believed that this yakuza was Noa’s biological  father  except  that  the  upper  half  of  Noa’s  face  was  virtually  a mirror  image  of  Hansu’s.  In  time,  Noa  would  see  this.  He  had  not mentioned it to Kyunghee, but even if she had guessed at the truth herself, she would have kept her suspicions from Yoseb to protect Sunja, who was closer to her than a sister. 

“You don’t have a son,” Yoseb said, taking another guess. 

“Your brother was kind to help Sunja, but I would’ve taken care of her and my son.” 

“She must not have wanted that.” 

“I’d  offered  to  take  care  of  her,  but  she  didn’t  want  to  be  my  wife  in

Korea. Because I have a Japanese wife in Osaka.” 

Lying  on  his  back,  Yoseb  stared  at  the  barn  roof.  Jagged  slats  of  light broke through the beams. Column slivers of dust floated upward in diagonal lines. Before the fire, he had never noticed such small things; also, he had never  hated  anyone.  Though  he  shouldn’t,  Yoseb  hated  this  man—his expensive  clothes,  flashy  shoes,  his  unchecked  confidence,  reeking  of  a devilish invulnerability. He hated him for not being in pain. He had no right to claim his brother’s child. 

Hansu could see Yoseb’s anger. 

“She wanted me to go, so I left at first, planning to come back. When I returned, she was gone. Already married. To your brother.” 

Yoseb didn’t know what to believe. He had learned almost nothing about Sunja  from  Isak,  who  had  seemed  to  believe  that  Noa’s  origins  were  best forgotten. 

“You should leave Noa alone. He has a family. After the war, we’ll do everything possible to repay you.” 

Hansu folded his arms close to his chest and smiled before speaking. 

“You son of a bitch, I paid. I paid for your life. I paid for everyone’s life. 

Everyone would be dead without me.” 

Yoseb shifted to his side a little and winced from the pain. Sometimes he felt like he was still on fire. 

“Did Sunja tell you?” Hansu asked. 

“Just  look  at  the  child’s  face.  It  doesn’t  make  sense  for  anyone  to  go through all this trouble, and I know you’re not some sort of saint. I know what you are—” 

Hansu  laughed  out  loud.  It  was  almost  out  of  respect  for  Yoseb’s directness. 

“We’re going back home,” Yoseb said, and closed his eyes. 

“Pyongyang’s  controlled  by  the  Russians,  and  the  Americans  are  in charge of Busan. You want to go back to that?” 

“It’s not going to be like that forever,” Yoseb said. 

“You’ll starve there.” 

“I’m done with Japan.” 

“And  how  will  you  go  back  to  Pyongyang  or  Busan?  You  can’t  even walk down the length of this farm.” 

“The company owes me my wages. When I’m well enough, I’ll go back

to Nagasaki to collect my pay.” 

“When’s the last time you read a newspaper?” Hansu pulled out a sheaf of Korean and Japanese newspapers he’d brought for Kim from the crates. 

He put the stack beside Yoseb’s pallet. 

Yoseb glanced at the papers but refused to pick them up. 

“There’s  no  money  for  you.”  Hansu  spoke  to  him  slowly  as  if  Yoseb were  a  child.  “The  company  will  never  pay  you.  Never.  There  are  no records  for  your  work,  and  you  can’t  prove  it.  The  government  wants nothing more than for every poor Korean to go back, but it won’t give you the fare or a sen for your troubles. Ha.” 

“What do you mean? How do you know?” Yoseb asked. 

“I know. I know Japan,” Hansu said, looking privately disappointed. He had lived among the Japanese for all of his adult life. His father-in-law was unquestionably the most powerful Japanese moneylender in Kansai. Hansu could say with confidence that the Japanese were pathologically intractable when they wanted to be. In this, they were exactly like the Koreans except their stubbornness was quieter, harder to detect. 

“Do you know how hard it is to get money out of the Japanese? If they don’t want to pay you, they will never ever pay you. You’re wasting your time.” 

Yoseb’s body felt itchy and warm. 

“Every day, for every one boat that heads out to Korea filled with idiots wanting  to  go  home,  two  boats  filled  with  refugees  come  back  because there’s  nothing  to  eat  there.  The  guys  who  come  straight  from  Korea  are even  more  desperate  than  you.  They’ll  work  for  week-old  bread.  Women will whore after two days of hunger, or one if they have children to feed. 

You’re living for a dream of a home that no longer exists.” 

“My parents are there.” 

“No. No, they’re not.” 

Yoseb turned to look at Hansu’s eyes. 

“Why do you think I brought back only Sunja’s mother. Do you really think I couldn’t find your parents and your in-laws?” 

“You  don’t  know  what  happened  to  them,”  Yoseb  said.  Neither  he  nor Kyunghee had heard from them in over a year. 

“They  were  shot.  All  landowners  who  were  foolish  enough  to  stick around were shot. Communists see people only in simple categories.” 

Yoseb wept and covered his eyes. 

The lie had to be told, and Hansu did not mind telling it. If the parents weren’t  dead  already,  Yoseb’s  and  Kyunghee’s  parents  would  starve  to death or die of old age inevitably. They could have very well been shot. The conditions  in  the  communist-occupied  North  were  awful.  There  were numerous landowners who’d been rounded up, killed, and shoved into mass graves. No, he didn’t know for certain if Yoseb’s parents were alive or not, and yes, he could have learned the truth if he didn’t mind risking some of his men to find them, but he didn’t see the point of it. He didn’t see how their lives could be useful for his purposes. It had been easy to find Sunja’s mother—barely two days of his man’s time. In the scheme of things, it was preferable  for  Yoseb  and  Kyunghee  to  lose  their  parents,  because  Sunja would have followed them blindly out of some preposterous sense of duty. 

Yoseb and Kyunghee would be better off in Japan for now, anyway. Hansu would never allow his son to go to Pyongyang. 

Hansu opened one of the parcels and withdrew a large bottle of soju. He opened it and passed it to Yoseb, then left the barn to see Tamaguchi about a payment. 

After finishing her work, Sunja finally returned to the barn, and she found Hansu waiting for her. He was sitting by himself by the feed bins at the far end  of  the  barn,  a  good  distance  away  from  the  boys,  who  were  reading. 

Yoseb  was  sleeping  soundly.  Kyunghee  and  Yangjin  were  in  the  house cooking  dinner  while  Kim  loaded  the  sacks  of  potatoes  in  the  cold  shed. 

Hansu said hello to her first and waved her toward him openly, no longer feeling the need to be discreet. 

Sunja stood by the bench opposite Hansu. 

“Sit, sit,” he insisted, but she refused. 

“Tamaguchi  tells  me  that  he  wants  to  adopt  your  sons,”  Hansu  said quietly, smiling. 

“What?” 

“I told him you’d never let them go. He offered to take just one of them even. The poor man. Don’t worry. He can’t take them.” 

“Soon, we’ll go to Pyongyang,” she said. 

“No. That’s not going to happen.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“Everyone there is dead. Kyunghee’s parents. Your in-laws. All shot for owning property. These things happen when governments change. You have to get rid of your enemies. Landlords are enemies of the workers,” Hansu said. 

“Uh-muh.” Sunja sat down at last. 

“Yes, it’s sad, but nothing can be done.” 

Sunja  was  a  pragmatic  woman,  but  even  she  thought  Hansu  was unusually cruel. The more she got to know this man, the more she realized that the man she’d loved as a girl was an idea she’d had of him—feelings without any verification. 

“You  should  be  thinking  about  Noa’s  education.  I  brought  him  some books to study for his college entrance examinations.” 

“But—” 

“You cannot return home. You’re going to have to wait until things are more stable.” 

“It’s not your decision to make. My boys have no future here. If we can’t go back home now, we’ll go back when it’s safer.” 

Her voice had trembled, but she’d said what she’d needed to say. 

Hansu remained silent for a moment. 

“Whatever you decide to do later is one thing, but in the meantime, Noa should be studying for university. He’s twelve.” 

Sunja  had  been  thinking  of  Noa’s  schooling  but  hadn’t  known  how  to help  him.  Also,  how  would  she  pay  for  school?  They  didn’t  even  have enough  money  for  the  passage  home.  Out  of  Yoseb’s  hearing,  the  three women  talked  about  this  all  the  time.  They  had  to  get  back  to  Osaka  to figure out a way to make money again. 

“Noa should study while he’s in this country. Korea will be in chaos for a long time. Besides, he’s already a good Japanese student. When he goes back, he’ll have a degree from a good Japanese university. That’s what all the rich Koreans are doing, anyway—sending their kids abroad. If Noa gets into a university, I’ll pay for it. I’ll pay for Mozasu as well. I could get them some tutors when they return—” 

“No,” she said loudly. “No.” 

He decided not to fight her, because she was stubborn. He had learned

this. Hansu pointed to the crates by Yoseb’s pallet. 

“I brought meat and dried fish. There’s also canned fruit and chocolate bars from America. I brought the same things for Tamaguchi’s family, too, so you don’t have to give them any of yours. There’s fabric in the bottom crate;  all  of  you  need  clothing,  I  think.  There’s  scissors,  thread,  and needles,” he added, proud of himself for having brought these things. “I’ll bring wool next time.” 

Sunja didn’t know what she was supposed to do anymore. It wasn’t that she was ungrateful. Mostly, she felt ashamed of her life, her powerlessness. 

With  her  sun-browned  hands  and  dirty  fingernails,  she  touched  her uncombed hair. She didn’t want him to see her this way. It occurred to her that she would never be lovely again. 

“I  brought  some  newspapers.  Have  someone  read  them  to  you.  The stories  are  the  same—you  can’t  go  back  now.  It  would  be  terrible  for  the boys.” 

Sunja faced him. 

“That’s how you got me to come here, and now that’s how you’re trying to get me to stay in Japan. You’d said it would be better for the boys so I brought them to the farm.” 

“I wasn’t wrong.” 

“I don’t trust you.” 

“You are trying to hurt me, Sunja. That makes no sense.” He shook his head.  “Remember,  your  husband  would  have  wanted  the  boys  to  go  to school. I also want what’s best for the boys and for you, Sunja. You and I—

we’re good friends,” he said calmly. “We will always be good friends. We will always have Noa.” 

He waited to see if she would say anything, but it was as if her face had closed  like  a  door.  “And  your  brother-in-law  knows.  About  Noa.  I  didn’t tell him. He figured it out.” 

Sunja covered her mouth with her hand. 

“You needn’t worry. Everything will be fine. If you want to move back to  Osaka,  Kim  will  make  the  arrangements.  Refusing  my  help  would  be selfish.  You  should  give  your  sons  every  advantage.  I  can  give  both  your sons many advantages.” 

Before she could speak, Kim had returned to the barn. He walked past the boys, who were still absorbed in their books. 

“Boss,”  Kim  said.  “It’s  good  to  see  you.  Can  I  get  you  something  to drink?” 

Hansu said no. 

Sunja realized she’d failed to offer him anything. 

“So, are you ready to return to Osaka?” Hansu asked Kim. 

“Yes,  sir,”  Kim  said,  smiling.  Sunja  appeared  distressed,  but  he  said nothing to her for now. 

“Boys,”  Hansu  shouted  across  the  length  of  the  barn,  “how  are  the books?” 

Kim waved at them to come closer, and the boys ran to him. 

“Noa, do you want to go back to school?” Hansu asked. 

“Yes, sir. But—” 

“If you want to go back to school, you need to go back to Osaka right away.” 

“How about the farm? And Korea?” Noa asked, straightening his back. 

“You can’t go back to Korea for a while, but in the meantime, you can’t let your head become empty,” Hansu said, smiling. “What do you think of those exam books I brought you? Are they difficult?” 

“Yes, sir, but I want to learn them. I need a dictionary, I think.” 

“We’ll get you one,” Hansu said proudly. “You study, and I will send you to school. A boy shouldn’t have to worry about school fees. It’s important that  older  Koreans  support  young  Koreans  in  their  studies.  How  else  will we have a great nation unless we support our children?” 

Noa beamed, and Sunja could not say anything. 

“But I want to stay at the farm,” Mozasu interrupted. “That’s not fair. I don’t want to go back to school. I hate school.” 

Hansu and Kim laughed. 

Noa  pulled  Mozasu  toward  him  and  bowed.  They  headed  to  the  other side of the barn. 

When they were far enough away from the grown-ups, Mozasu said to Noa, 

“Tamaguchi-san said we could live here forever. He said we were like his sons.” 

“Mozasu, we can’t keep living in this barn.” 

“I like the chickens. I didn’t get pecked even once this morning when I got the eggs. The barn is nice to sleep in, especially since Aunt Kyunghee made us those hay blankets.” 

“Well, you’ll feel differently when you get older,” Noa said, cradling the thick  volumes  of  the  examination  books  in  his  arms.  “Appa  would’ve wanted us to go to university and become educated people.” 

“I hate books,” Mozasu said, scowling. 

“I love them. I could read books all day and do nothing else.  Appa loved to read, too.” 

Mozasu plowed into Noa in an attempt to wrestle him, and Noa laughed. 

“Brother, what was  appa like?” Mozasu sat up and looked at his brother soberly. 

“He  was  tall.  And  he  had  light-colored  skin  like  you.  He  wore  glasses like  me.  He  was  very  good  at  school  and  good  at  teaching  himself  things from books. He loved learning. He was happy when he was reading; he told me so.” 

Noa smiled. 

“Like you,” Mozasu said. “Not like me. Well, I like manga.” 

“That’s not real reading.” 

Mozasu shrugged. 

“He was always nice to  umma and me. He used to tease Uncle Yoseb and make him laugh.  Appa taught me how to write my letters and remember the multiplication tables. I was the first one in school to know them by heart.” 

“Was he rich?” 

“No. Ministers can’t be rich.” 

“I  want  to  be  rich,”  Mozasu  said.  “I  want  to  have  a  big  truck  and  a driver.” 

“I thought you wanted to live in a barn,” Noa said, smiling, “and collect chicken eggs every morning.” 

“I’d rather have a truck like Hansu  ajeossi.” 

“I’d rather be an educated man like  appa.” 

“Not me,” Mozasu said. “I want to make a lot of money, then  umma and Aunt Kyunghee wouldn’t have to work anymore.” 

9

Osaka, 1949

After the family returned to Osaka, Hansu gave Kim the job of collecting fees from the store owners at Tsuruhashi market. In exchange for these fees, Hansu’s  company  gave  the  owners  protection  and  support.  Naturally,  no one wanted to pay these not-insignificant sums, but there was little choice in the matter. On the rare instances when someone cried poor or foolishly refused to pay, Hansu sent his other men, not Kim, to address the situation. 

For a store owner, such fee payments were a long-established practice—just one more cost of doing business. 

Any  agent  who  worked  for  Hansu  had  to  look  the  part  of  the  larger organization,  and  the  men  who  worked  for  Hansu,  both  Japanese  and Korean, took special pains to keep a low profile, avoiding any unnecessary negative attention. Except for his nearsightedness, corrected with his thick eyeglasses, Kim was a pleasant-looking man—humble, diligent, and well-spoken.  Hansu  preferred  Kim  to  do  the  collection  because  Kim  was effective and unfailingly polite; he was the clean wrapper for a filthy deed. 

It  was  Saturday  evening,  and  Kim  had  just  collected  the  week’s payments—over  sixty  packets  of  cash,  each  covered  in  fresh  paper  and labeled with the name of the business. No one had missed a payment. When he  reached  Hansu’s  parked  sedan,  Kim  bowed  to  his  boss,  who  was  just stepping out of the car. His driver would pick them up later. 

“Let’s have a drink,” Hansu said, patting Kim on the back. They walked

in the direction of the market. Along the road, men continuously bowed to Hansu,  and  he  acknowledged  them  with  nods.  He  stopped  for  no  one, however. 

“I’m going to take you to a new place. Pretty girls there. You must want one after living in a barn for so long.” 

Kim  laughed  out  of  surprise.  His  boss  didn’t  normally  discuss  such things. 

“You like the married one,” Hansu said. “I know.” 

Kim kept walking, unable to reply. 

“Sunja’s  sister-in-law,”  Hansu  said,  looking  straight  ahead  as  they walked  down  the  narrow  market  street.  “She’s  still  good-looking.  Her husband can’t do it anymore. He’s drinking more,  nee?” 

Kim removed his glasses and cleaned the lenses with his handkerchief. 

He  liked  Yoseb  and  felt  bad  for  not  saying  something.  Yoseb  drank  a  lot, but he was not a bad man. It was clear that the men in the neighborhood still admired  him.  At  home,  when  Yoseb  felt  well  enough,  he  helped  the  boys with schoolwork and taught them Korean. On occasion, he fixed machines for  some  factory  owners  he  knew,  but  in  his  condition,  he  couldn’t  work regularly. 

“How’s the house?” Hansu asked. 

“I’ve never lived so well.” 

Kim was telling the truth. “The meals are delicious. The house is very clean.” 

“The women need a workingman to watch over them. But I worry that you’re too attached to the married one.” 

“Boss, I’ve been thinking more about going back home. Not to Daegu, but to the North.” 

“This  again?  No.  End  of  discussion.  I  don’t  care  if  you  go  to  those socialist meetings, but don’t start believing that horseshit about returning to the motherland. The heads of  Mindan are no better. Besides, they’ll kill you in  the  North,  and  they’ll  starve  you  in  the  South.  They  all  hate  Koreans who’ve  been  living  in  Japan.  I  know.  If  you  go,  I  will  never  support  it. 

Never.” 

“The leader Kim Il Sung fought against Japanese imperialism—” 

“I know his guys. Some of them might actually believe the message, but most of them are just trying to collect a pay envelope each week. The ones

in charge who live here are never going back. You watch.” 

“But  don’t  you  think  we  must  do  something  for  our  country?  These foreigners are cutting up the nation into—” 

Hansu put both his hands on Kim’s shoulders and faced him squarely. 

“You haven’t had a girl in such a long time that you can’t think straight.” 

Hansu smiled, then looked serious again. “Listen, I know the heads of both the Association and  Mindan”—he snorted—“I know them very, very well

—” 

“But  Mindan’s a mere puppet of the American—” 

Hansu smiled at Kim, amused by the young man’s sincerity. 

“How long have you worked for me?” 

“I must’ve been twelve or thirteen when you gave me a job.” 

“How many times have I really talked politics with you?” 

Kim tried to remember. 

“Never.  Not  really.  I’m  a  businessman.  And  I  want  you  to  be  a businessman. And whenever you go to these meetings, I want you to think for yourself, and I want you to think about promoting your own interests no matter  what.  All  these  people—both  the  Japanese  and  the  Koreans—are fucked  because  they  keep  thinking  about  the  group.  But  here’s  the  truth: There’s  no  such  thing  as  a  benevolent  leader.  I  protect  you  because  you work for me. If you act like a fool and go against my interests, then I can’t protect  you.  As  for  these  Korean  groups,  you  have  to  remember  that  no matter what, the men who are in charge are just men—so they’re not much smarter than pigs. And we eat pigs. You lived with that farmer Tamaguchi who  sold  sweet  potatoes  for  obscene  prices  to  starving  Japanese  during  a time of war. He violated wartime regulations, and I helped him, because he wanted money and I do, too. He probably thinks he’s a decent, respectable Japanese, or some kind of proud nationalist—don’t they all? He’s a terrible Japanese, but a smart businessman. I’m not a good Korean, and I’m not a Japanese. I’m very good at making money. This country would fall apart if everyone believed in some samurai crap. The Emperor does not give a fuck about anyone, either. So I’m not going to tell you not to go to any meetings or not to join any group. But know this: Those communists don’t care about you.  They  don’t  care  about  anybody.  You’re  crazy  if  you  think  they  care about Korea.” 

“Sometimes, I’d like to see my home again,” Kim said quietly. 

“For people like us, home doesn’t exist.” Hansu took out a cigarette, and Kim rushed to light it. 

Kim had not been back home in over twenty years. His mother had died when he was a toddler, and his tenant farmer father died not much later; his older  sister  did  what  she  could  for  him  but  eventually  married,  then disappeared,  leaving  him  to  beg.  Kim  wanted  to  go  to  the  North  to  help with the reunification efforts, but he also wanted to go to Daegu to clean his parents’ graves and do a proper  jesa now that he could afford it. 

Hansu took a long drag of his cigarette. 

“You think I like it here? No, I don’t like it here. But here, I know what to expect. You don’t want to be poor. Changho-ya, you’ve worked for me, you’ve had enough food and money, so you’ve started to think about ideas

—that’s normal. Patriotism is just an idea, so is capitalism or communism. 

But ideas can make men forget their own interests. And the guys in charge will exploit men who believe in ideas too much. You can’t fix Korea. Not even a hundred of you or a hundred of me can fix Korea. The Japs are out and  now  Russia,  China,  and  America  are  fighting  over  our  shitty  little country. You think you can fight them? Forget Korea. Focus on something you can have. You want that married one? Fine. Then either get rid of the husband or wait until he’s dead. This is something you can fix.” 

“She’s not going to leave him.” 

“He’s a loser.” 

“No, no, he’s not,” Kim said gravely. “And she’s not the kind of woman who’d  just—”  He  couldn’t  talk  about  this  anymore.  He  could  wait  until Yoseb  died,  but  it  was  wrong  to  want  a  man  to  die.  He  believed  in  many ideas,  including  the  idea  that  a  wife  must  be  loyal  to  her  husband.  If Kyunghee left a broken man, she would be less worthy of his devotion. 

At  the  end  of  the  street,  Hansu  stopped  walking  and  tilted  his  head toward a plain-looking bar. 

“You want a girl now, or do you want to go back to the house and want someone else’s wife?” 

Kim stared at the handle of the door, then pulled it open, letting his boss enter first before following him inside. 

The new house in Osaka was two tatami mats larger than the old one and sturdier—built out of tile, solid wood, and brick. As Hansu had predicted, the bombings had razed the original house. Kyunghee had sewn their legal documents in the lining of her good coat, and when it came time, Hansu’s lawyer made the municipal government recognize Yoseb’s property rights. 

With  the  gift  money  Tamaguchi  had  given  them  when  they  left  the  farm, Yoseb and Kyunghee bought the vacant lot adjacent to their original house. 

They  rebuilt  their  home  with  the  help  of  Hansu’s  construction  company. 

Again,  Yoseb  told  none  of  their  neighbors  that  he  was  the  owner  of  the house—it always being wiser to appear poorer than you are. The exterior of the  house  was  nearly  identical  to  the  other  dwellings  on  their  street  in Ikaino.  The  family  had  agreed  that  Kim  should  live  with  them,  and  when Yoseb  asked  him,  he  did  not  refuse.  The  women  papered  the  walls  with good-quality paper and bought strong, thick glass for their little windows. 

They  spent  a  little  extra  for  better  fabric  to  make  warm  quilts  and  floor cushions and bought a low Korean dining table for meals and for the boys to do their homework. 

Though  from  the  facade  the  house  didn’t  look  like  much  more  than  a roomy  shack,  inside  was  an  exceptionally  clean  and  well-organized  house with  a  proper  kitchen  that  had  enough  space  to  store  their  food  carts overnight.  It  had  an  attached  outhouse,  which  could  be  entered  from  the kitchen door. Yangjin, Sunja, and the boys slept in the middle room, which during the day served as the main room; Yoseb and Kyunghee slept in the large storage room by the kitchen, and Kim slept in the tiny front room, its two  walls  made  up  of  paper  screen  doors.  All  seven  of  them—three generations  and  one  family  friend—lived  in  the  house  in  Ikaino. 

Considering  the  neighborhood,  their  accommodations  were  almost luxurious. 

Late  in  the  evening,  when  Kim  finally  returned  home  from  the  bar, everyone  was  asleep.  Hansu  had  paid  for  a  Korean  girl,  an  exceptionally attractive  one,  and  Kim  went  to  the  back  room  with  her.  Afterward,  he’d wanted to go to a bathhouse, but the ones near the house were closed for the night. He washed up as well as he could in the sink by the outhouse, but he still had the waxy flavor of the girl’s frosty pink lipstick in his mouth. 

The girl had been young, twenty if that, and when she wasn’t in the back rooms, she worked as a waitress. The war and the American occupation had

toughened her, like the other girls who worked at the bar, and because she was so pretty, she had been with many men. She went by the name Jinah. 

In one of the back rooms reserved for paying customers, Jinah shut the door and took off her floral-print dress right away. She wore no underwear. 

Her  body  was  long  and  thin,  with  the  round,  high  breasts  of  a  young  girl who didn’t need a brassiere and the skinny legs of a hungry peasant. She sat on  his  lap,  making  a  soft  grinding  gesture,  and  made  him  hard,  then gingerly  led  him  to  an  oxblood-colored  pallet  on  the  floor.  She  undressed him, wiped him expertly with a warm, wet towel, then put a prophylactic on him with her painted mouth. It had been a long time since he had been with a girl. He’d only been with whores, but this one had the loveliest face and figure,  and  he  could  understand  why  she  cost  so  much  even  though  he wasn’t paying this time. Jinah called him  Oppa, and asked if he wanted to enter her now, and he had nodded, astonished by her skillfulness—at once charming and professional. She pushed him down gently and clambered on his hips and pulled him inside her in a single thrust. She kissed his forehead and hair, letting him bury his head between her breasts as they fucked. He didn’t  know  if  she  was  pretending,  but  she  seemed  to  like  what  she  was doing, unlike the other whores, who’d pretended to be virginal. There was no  false  protest,  and  Kim  found  himself  deeply  excited  by  her  and  came almost right away. She lay in his arms for a little while, then got up to get a towel  for  him.  As  she  cleaned  him,  she  called  him  her  handsome  brother and asked him to return to see her soon, because Jinah would be thinking about his eel. Kim almost wanted to stay the night to try to have her again, but Hansu was waiting for him at the bar, so Kim promised to return. 

In his room, someone had already unfolded his pallet to make his bed. Kim lay down on his clean, starched cotton pallet, imagining Kyunghee’s slender fingers smoothing down the blankets on which he rested, and as usual, he imagined making love to her. A married woman could not be surprised by sex, he thought, but he wondered if she could enjoy it the way Jinah seemed to. What would he think of her if she did? In the barn, he’d always fallen asleep before the women, and he was grateful for this schedule, because he could not bear the idea of Yoseb being on top of her. Fortunately, he never

heard any noises, and in this house, he did not hear them, either. He felt sure that  Yoseb  no  longer  slept  with  his  wife,  and  this  knowledge  gave  him permission  to  love  her  and  to  not  hate  him.  This  way,  she  was  his,  too. 

Hansu  had  detected  his  feelings,  because  he  was  obvious  about  them;  he could not resist watching her soft face, her graceful quiet movements. He thought if he could be with her, he would die. What would it be like to be with  her  each  night?  When  they’d  worked  beside  each  other  at  the restaurant, and when he was alone with her at the farm, it had been almost maddening  to  keep  from  clasping  her  body  to  his.  What  kept  him  from doing so was the knowledge that she would never respond to him; she loved her  husband,  and  she  loved   Yesu  Kuristo,  her  god,  whom  Kim  could  not believe  in  and  who  did  not  allow  his  followers  to  have  sex  outside  of marriage. 

Kim  closed  his  eyes,  wanting  her  to  open  the  thin  paper  door  to  his room. She could slip off her dress the way the whore had done and put her mouth over him. He would pull her up to him and tuck her into his body. He would make love to her and wish for his death, because his life would have been  perfect  at  that  moment.  Kim  could  envision  her  small  breasts,  pale stomach and legs, the shadow of her pubis. He grew hard again and laughed quietly, thinking that he was like a boy tonight, because he felt he could do it again and again and never have enough. Hansu was wrong to think that a pretty  whore  would  take  his  mind  off  Kyunghee;  in  fact,  he  wanted  her more now, far more than he ever had. He had tasted something sweet and cool tonight, and now he wanted an immense tubful of it—enough to bathe deeply in its refreshment. 

Kim rubbed himself and fell asleep with his glasses on. 

In  the  morning,  Kim  rose  before  the  others  and  went  to  work  without having  breakfast.  That  evening,  as  he  walked  home,  he  noticed  a  pair  of slight shoulders pushing a confection cart down the street. He ran to catch up with her. 

“Let me.” 

“Oh, hello.” Kyunghee smiled in relief. “We were worried about you this morning  when  you  were  gone.  We  didn’t  see  you  last  night.  Did  you  eat

today?” 

“I’m all right. You don’t need to worry about me.” 

He  noticed  that  the  stack  of  bags  used  to  pack  up  the  candies  were  all gone. “You’re out of bags. You did well today?” 

She  nodded,  smiling  again.  “I  sold  everything,  but  the  price  of  black sugar has gone up again. Maybe I can make jellies. They require less sugar. 

I need to find some new recipes.” Kyunghee stopped walking to wipe her brow with the back of her hand. 

Kim took the cart from her to push it. 

“Is Sunja at home already?” he asked. 

Kyunghee nodded, looking worried. 

“What’s the matter, Sister?” 

“I’m hoping there won’t be a fight tonight. My husband’s being too hard on everyone lately. Also, he’s—” She didn’t want to say any more. Yoseb’s health was declining precipitously, but he was unfortunately well enough to feel the horrible discomfort of his burns and injuries. Every little thing upset him, and when he was angry, he never held back anymore. His poor hearing made him shout, a thing he had never done before the war. 

“It’s about the boys’ school. You know.” 

Kim nodded. Yoseb had been telling Sunja that the boys had to go to a Korean school in the neighborhood because the family had to be ready to go back. The boys had to learn Korean. Hansu was telling Sunja the opposite. 

Sunja  couldn’t  say  anything,  but  everyone  knew  it  was  a  terrible  time  to return. 

The road to their house was empty. As the sun set, the dusk gave off a muted gray-and-pink light. 

“It’s nice when it’s quiet,” she said. 

“Yes.” Kim grasped the cart handle a little tighter. 

Strands  of  her  bun  had  come  loose,  and  Kyunghee  smoothed  her  hair behind  her  ears.  Even  at  the  end  of  a  long  workday,  there  was  still something so clean and bright in her expression; it could not be defiled. 

“Last night, he yelled at her again about the schools. My husband means well.  He’s  also  in  a  lot  of  pain.  Noa  wants  to  go  to  Japanese  school.  He wants to go to Waseda University. Can you imagine? Such a big school like that!”  She  smiled,  feeling  proud  of  his  grand  dream.  “And,  well,  Mozasu never wants to go to school at all.” She laughed. “Of course, it isn’t clear

when we can return now, but the boys need to learn how to read and write. 

Don’t  you  think?”  Kyunghee  found  herself  crying,  but  couldn’t  explain why. 

From his coat pocket, Kim dug out a handkerchief that he used to clean his glasses and gave it to her. 

“There are so many things we can’t control,” he said. 

She nodded. 

“Do you want to go home?” 

Without  looking  at  his  face,  she  said,  “I  can’t  believe  my  parents  are dead. In my dreams, they seem alive. I’d like to see them again.” 

“But you can’t go back now. It’s dangerous. When things get better—” 

“Do you think that will be soon?” 

“Well, you know how we are.” 

“What do you mean?” she asked. 

“Koreans.  We  argue.  Every  man  thinks  he’s  smarter  than  the  next.  I suppose whoever is in charge will fight very hard to keep his power.” He repeated  only  what  Hansu  had  told  him,  because  Hansu  was  right, especially  when  it  came  to  seeing  the  worst  in  people—in  this,  he  was always right. 

“So you’re not a communist, then?” she asked. 

“What?” 

“You go to those political meetings. I thought if you went to them, then perhaps they’re not so bad. And they’re against the Japanese government, and  they  want  to  reunify  the  country,  right?  I  mean,  aren’t  the  Americans trying to break up the country? I hear things at the market from the others, but it’s hard to know what to believe. My husband said that the communists are a bad lot; they’re the ones who shot our parents. You know, my father smiled at everyone. He always did good things.” 

Kyunghee could not understand why her parents were killed. Her father had been the third son, so his plot had been very small. Had the communists killed all the landowners? Even the insignificant ones? She was curious as to what Kim thought, too, because he was a good man and knew a lot about the world. 

Kim  leaned  in  to  the  cart,  and  he  looked  at  her  carefully,  wanting  to comfort her. He knew she was looking to him for advice, and it made him feel  important.  With  a  woman  like  this  by  him,  he  wondered  if  he  would

even care about politics anymore. 

“Are there different kinds of communists?” she asked. 

“I think so. I don’t know if I’m a communist. I am against the Japanese taking over Korea again, and I don’t want the Russians and the Chinese to control Korea, either. Or the Americans. I wonder why Korea can’t be left alone.” 

“But  you  just  said,  we  quarrel.  I  suppose  it’s  like  when  two  grannies have a dispute, and the villagers constantly whisper in their ears about the wickedness of the other one. If the grannies want to have any peace, they have to forget everyone else and remember that they used to be friends.” 

“I think we should put you in charge,” he said, pushing the cart toward the house. Even if it was just this brief walk, he felt happy to be with her, but of course, it made him want more. He’d gone to those meetings to get out of the house, because sometimes being near her was too much. He lived in  that  house  because  he  needed  to  see  her  every  day.  He  loved  her.  This would never change, he thought. His situation was impossible. 

Only  a  few  paces  from  home,  the  two  walked  slowly,  murmuring  this and  that  about  their  day,  content  and  only  a  little  less  shy.  He  would continue to suffer with love. 

10

Osaka, January 1953

Worried about money, Sunja had woken up in the middle of the night to make candies to sell. When Yangjin noticed that her daughter wasn’t in bed, she went to the kitchen. 

“You don’t sleep anymore,” Yangjin said. “You’ll get sick if you don’t sleep.” 

“Umma, I’m fine. You should go back to bed.” 

“I’m  old.  I  don’t  need  to  sleep  so  much,”  Yangjin  said,  putting  on  her apron. 

Sunja was trying to make extra money for Noa’s tutoring fees. He had failed  his  first  attempt  at  the  Waseda  exams  by  a  few  points,  and  he  felt certain  that  he’d  be  able  to  pass  on  his  next  try  if  he  could  be  tutored  in mathematics. The fees for the tutors were exorbitant. The women had been trying to earn more so Noa could leave his job as a bookkeeper to study full time,  but  it  was  difficult  enough  to  manage  their  household  costs  and Yoseb’s  medical  bills  on  his  salary  and  their  earnings  from  selling  food. 

Each week, Kim gave them money for his room and board. He had tried to add to Noa’s tutoring fund, but Yoseb forbade the women from taking any more  than  what  was  a  reasonable  sum.  Yoseb  would  not  allow  Sunja  to accept any money from Hansu for Noa’s schooling. 

“Did you sleep at all last night?” Yangjin asked. 

Sunja nodded, laying a clean cloth over the large chunks of black sugar

to muffle the sound of the mortar and pestle. 

Yangjin was exhausted herself. In three years, she’d turn sixty. When she was a girl, she’d believed that she could work harder than anyone under any circumstances, but she no longer felt that way. Lately, Yangjin felt tired and impatient;  small  things  bothered  her.  Aging  was  supposed  to  make  you more patient, but in her case, she felt angrier. Sometimes, when a customer complained about the small size of the portions, she wanted to tell him off. 

Lately, what upset her most was her daughter’s impossible silence. Yangjin wanted to shake her. 

The kitchen was the warmest room in the house, and the electric lights emitted  a  steady  light.  Against  the  papered  walls,  the  two  bare  lightbulbs attached  to  the  ceiling  by  their  electric  cords  made  stark  shadows, resembling two lonely gourds hanging from leafless vines. 

“I still think about our girls,” Yangjin said. 

“Dokhee and Bokhee? Didn’t they find work in China?” 

“I  shouldn’t  have  let  them  go  with  that  smooth-talking  woman  from Seoul.  But  the  girls  were  so  excited  about  traveling  to  Manchuria  and earning money. They promised to return when they made enough to buy the boardinghouse. They were good girls.” 

Sunja nodded, recalling their sweetness. She didn’t know people like that anymore. It seemed as if the occupation and the war had changed everyone, and  now  the  war  in  Korea  was  making  things  worse.  Once-tenderhearted people  seemed  wary  and  tough.  There  was  innocence  left  only  in  the smallest children. 

“At the market, I hear that the girls who went to work in factories were taken  somewhere  else,  and  they  had  to  do  terrible,  terrible  things  with Japanese soldiers.” Yangjin paused, still confounded. “Do you think this can be true?” 

Sunja  had  heard  the  same  stories,  and  Hansu  had  warned  her  on  more than one occasion of the Korean recruiters, working for the Japanese army, falsely promising good jobs, but she didn’t want her mother to worry any more. Sunja ground the sugar as finely as she could. 

“What if the girls were taken? For that?” Yangjin asked. 

“Umma, we don’t know,” Sunja whispered. She lit the fire in the stove and poured sugar and water into the pan. 

“That’s what happened. I just feel it.” Yangjin nodded to herself. “Your

 appa—it  would  make  him  so  sad  that  we  lost  our  boardinghouse— aigoo. 

And  now  this  fighting  in  Korea.  We  can’t  go  back  yet  because  the  army would take Noa and Mozasu. Isn’t that right?” 

Sunja nodded. She could not let her sons become soldiers. 

Yangjin  shivered.  The  draft  seeping  through  the  kitchen  window  stung her dry, brown skin, and she tucked a towel around the sill. Yangjin pulled her  shabby  cotton  vest  tightly  over  her  nightclothes.  She  started  to  crush sugar for the next batch while Sunja watched the bubbling pot on the low flame. 

Sunja  stirred  the  pot  as  the  sugar  caramelized.  Busan  seemed  like another  life  compared  to  Osaka;  Yeongdo,  their  little  rocky  island,  stayed impossibly fresh and sunny in her memory, though she hadn’t been back in twenty years. When Isak had tried to explain heaven, she had imagined her hometown  as  paradise—a  clear,  shimmering  beauty.  Even  the  memory  of the moon and stars in Korea seemed different than the cold moon here; no matter  how  much  people  complained  about  how  bad  things  were  back home, it was difficult for Sunja to imagine anything but the bright, sturdy house that her father had taken care of so well by the green, glassy sea, the bountiful  garden  that  had  given  them  watermelons,  lettuces,  and  squash, and the open-air market that never ran out of anything delicious. When she was there, she had not loved it enough. 

The news reports from back home were so horrific—cholera, starvation, and soldiers who kidnapped your sons, even little boys—that their meager life in Osaka and their pathetic attempts to scrounge up enough money to send  Noa  to  college  seemed  luxurious  in  contrast.  At  least  they  were together.  At  least  they  could  work  toward  something  better.  The  war  in Korea roused commerce in Japan, and there were more jobs to be had by all.  At  least  here,  the  Americans  were  still  in  charge,  so  the  women  were able to find sugar and wheat. Although Yoseb prohibited Sunja from taking money  from  Hansu,  when  Kim  found  any  of  the  scarce  ingredients  the women needed through his connections, the women knew enough not to ask too many questions or to talk about it with Yoseb. 

As soon as the taffy cooled on the metal pan, the women worked quickly to cut the candy into neat squares. 

“Dokhee  used  to  tease  me  about  the  sloppy  way  I  cut  onions,”  Sunja said,  smiling.  “And  she  couldn’t  bear  how  slowly  I  washed  the  rice  pots. 

And every morning when I would clean the floors, she would say without fail, ‘Always use two rags to clean the floors. First, sweep, then wipe with a clean rag, and then wipe it again with a fresh one!’ Dokhee was the cleanest person  I  have  ever  met.”  As  she  spoke  the  words,  Sunja  could  recall Dokhee’s round and simple face growing somber while giving instructions. 

Her expressions, mannerisms, and voice were equally vivid, and Sunja, who did not pray often, prayed to God in her heart for the girls. She prayed that they  were  not  taken  for  the  soldiers.  Isak  used  to  say  that  we  could  not know why some suffered more than others; he said we should never hasten to  judgment  when  others  endured  agony.  Why  was  she  spared  and  not them? she wondered. Why was she in this kitchen with her mother when so many were starving back home? Isak used to say that God had a plan, and Sunja  believed  this  could  be  so,  but  it  gave  her  little  consolation  now, thinking  of  the  girls.  Those  girls  had  been  more  innocent  than  her  sons when they were very little. 

When Sunja looked up from her task, her mother was weeping. 

“Those girls lost their mother, then their father. I should’ve done more for them. Tried to help them get married, but we had no money. A woman’s lot is to suffer. We must suffer.” 

Sunja  sensed  that  her  mother  was  right  that  the  girls  had  been  tricked. 

They were likely dead now. She put her hand on her mother’s shoulder. Her mother’s  hair  was  nearly  all  gray,  and  during  the  day,  she  wore  the  old-fashioned bun at the base of her neck. It was night, and her mother’s gray, scant braid hung down her back. The years of outdoor work had creased her brown oval face with deep grooves on her forehead and around her mouth. 

For as long as she could remember, her mother had been the first to rise and the last to go to bed; even when the girls had worked with them, her mother had worked as hard as the younger one. Never one to talk much, as she’d gotten older her mother had a lot more to say, but Sunja never seemed to know what to say to her. 

“Umma, remember digging up the potatoes with  appa?  Appa’s beautiful potatoes. They were fat and white and so good when you baked them in the ashes. I haven’t had a good potato like that since—” 

Yangjin  smiled.  There  had  been  happier  times.  Her  daughter  had  not forgotten Hoonie, who had been a wonderful father to her. So many of their babies had died, but they’d had Sunja. She had her still. 

“At least the boys are safe. Maybe that’s why we’re here. Yes.” Yangjin paused. “Maybe that’s why we’re here.” Her face brightened. “You know, your  Mozasu  is  such  a  funny  one.  Yesterday,  he  said  he  wants  to  live  in America  and  wear  a  suit  and  hat  like  in  the  movies.  He  said  he  wants  to have five sons!” 

Sunja laughed, because that sounded like Mozasu. 

“America? What did you say?” 

“I told him it’s okay as long as he visited me with his five sons!” 

The  kitchen  smelled  of  caramel,  and  the  women  worked  nimbly  until sunlight filled the house. 

School was a misery. Mozasu was thirteen and tall for his age. With broad shoulders  and  well-muscled  arms,  he  appeared  more  manly  than  some  of his  teachers.  Because  he  could  not  read  or  write  at  grade  level—despite Noa’s prodigious efforts to teach him kanji—Mozasu had been placed in a class full of ten-year-olds. Mozasu spoke Japanese just as well as his peers; if anything, he had tremendous verbal facility, which served him well in his regular battles with the older children. In arithmetic, he could keep up with the class, but writing and reading Japanese lamed him brutally. His teachers called him a Korean fool, and Mozasu was biding his time so he could be done  with  this  hell.  In  spite  of  the  war  and  all  their  academic  privations, Noa  had  finished  high  school,  and  whenever  he  wasn’t  working,  he  was studying  for  his  college  entrance  examinations.  He  never  left  the  house without  an  exam  study  book  and  one  of  his  old  English-language  novels, which he bought from the bookseller. 

Six  days  a  week,  Noa  worked  for  Hoji-san,  the  cheerful  Japanese  who owned most of the houses in their neighborhood. It was rumored that Hoji-san was in fact part  burakumin or Korean, but no one said too much about his shameful blood, since he was everyone’s landlord. It was possible that the vicious rumor that he was not pure Japanese could have been started by an  unhappy  tenant,  but  Hoji-san  did  not  seem  to  care.  As  his  bookkeeper and  secretary,  Noa  kept  Hoji-san’s  ledgers  in  excellent  order  and  wrote letters to the municipal offices in beautiful Japanese on his behalf. Despite his smiles and jokes, Hoji-san was ruthless when it came to getting his rent

money.  He  paid  Noa  very  little,  but  Noa  did  not  complain.  He  could’ve made  more  money  working  for  Koreans  in  the  pachinko  business  or  in yakiniku  restaurants,  but  Noa  didn’t  want  that.  He  wanted  to  work  in  a Japanese  office  and  have  a  desk  job.  Like  nearly  all  Japanese  business owners, Hoji-san would not normally hire Koreans, but Hoji-san’s nephew was Noa’s high school teacher, and Hoji-san, a man who knew how to find bargains, hired his nephew’s most brilliant pupil. 

In the evening, Noa helped Mozasu with his schoolwork, but they both knew it was pointless, since Mozasu had no interest in memorizing kanji. 

As his long-suffering tutor, Noa focused on teaching his brother sums and basic writing. With remarkable patience, Noa never got upset when Mozasu did poorly on his examinations. He knew how it was for most Koreans at school;  most  of  them  dropped  out,  and  he  didn’t  want  this  to  happen  to Mozasu, so he did not focus on exam grades. He even asked Uncle Yoseb and his mother to refrain from getting upset with Mozasu’s report cards. He told  them  that  the  goal  was  to  make  sure  that  Mozasu  had  better-than-average skills as a worker. If Noa hadn’t tried so hard and taught him with such care, Mozasu would’ve done what nearly all the other Korean boys in the  neighborhood  did  rather  than  go  to  school—collect  scrap  metal  for money, search for rotting food for the pigs their mothers bred and raised in their homes, or worse, get in trouble with the police for petty crimes. 

Ever  the  student,  after  Noa  helped  Mozasu,  he  studied  English  with  a dictionary  and  a  grammar  book.  In  the  only  academic  reversal,  Mozasu, who was more interested in English than Japanese or Korean, would help his  older  brother  learn  new  vocabulary  words  by  drilling  Noa  on  English words and phrases. 

At  the  dreadful  local  school,  Mozasu  hung  back  and  kept  to  himself during  lunch  and  recess.  There  were  four  other  Koreans  in  the  class,  but they  all  went  by  their  Japanese  pass  names  and  refused  to  discuss  their background,  especially  in  the  presence  of  other  Koreans.  Mozasu  knew with certainty who they were, because they lived on his street and he knew their  families.  All  of  them  were  only  ten  years  old,  so  the  Koreans  in  his grade  were  smaller  than  he  was,  and  Mozasu  stayed  away  from  them, feeling both contempt and pity. 

Most  Koreans  in  Japan  had  at  least  three  names.  Mozasu  went  by Mozasu  Boku,  the  Japanization  of  Moses  Baek,  and  rarely  used  his

Japanese  surname,  Bando,  the   tsumei  listed  on  his  school  documents  and residency  papers.  With  a  first  name  from  a  Western  religion,  an  obvious Korean  surname,  and  his  ghetto  address,  everyone  knew  what  he  was—

there was no point in denying it. The Japanese kids would have nothing to do  with  him,  but  Mozasu  no  longer  gave  a  shit.  When  he  was  younger, getting picked on used to bother him, though far less than it had bothered Noa, who had compensated by outperforming his classmates academically and athletically. Every day, before school began and after school ended, the bigger boys told Mozasu, “Go back to Korea, you smelly bastard.” If there was a crowd of them, Mozasu would keep walking; however, if there were only  one  or  two  assholes,  he  would  hit  them  as  hard  as  he  could  until  he saw blood. 

Mozasu knew he was becoming one of the bad Koreans. Police officers often arrested Koreans for stealing or home brewing. Every week, someone on  his  street  got  in  trouble  with  the  police.  Noa  would  say  that  because some  Koreans  broke  the  law,  everyone  got  blamed.  On  every  block  in Ikaino, there was a man who beat his wife, and there were girls who worked in bars who were said to take money for favors. Noa said that Koreans had to  raise  themselves  up  by  working  harder  and  being  better.  Mozasu  just wanted to hit everyone who said mean things. In Ikaino, there were homely old women who cussed and men who were so drunk that they slept outside their houses. The Japanese didn’t want Koreans to live near them, because they  weren’t  clean,  they  lived  with  pigs,  and  the  children  had  lice.  Also, Koreans  were  said  to  be  even  lower  than   burakumin  because  at  least burakumin had Japanese blood. Noa told Mozasu that his former teachers had told him he was a good Korean, and Mozasu understood that with his own  poor  grades  and  bad  manners,  those  same  teachers  would  think Mozasu was a bad one. 

So the fuck what? If the other ten-year-olds thought he was stupid, that was  okay.  If  they  thought  he  was  violent,  that  was  okay.  If  necessary, Mozasu  was  not  afraid  to  clean  out  all  the  teeth  right  from  their  mouths. 

You think I’m an animal, Mozasu thought, then I can be an animal and hurt you.  Mozasu  did  not  intend  to  be  a  good  Korean.  What  was  the  point  in that? 

Before spring, a few months before the war in Korea ended, a new boy from  Kyoto  joined  his  class.  He  was  eleven,  going  on  twelve.  Haruki

Totoyama was obviously a poor kid, evident from his shabby uniform and pathetic  shoes.  He  was  also  wiry  and  nearsighted.  The  boy  had  a  small, triangular  face,  and  he  might  have  been  acceptable  to  the  others,  but unfortunately, someone let it out that he lived on the border street between the  Korean  ghetto  and  the  Japanese  poor.  Quickly,  rumors  spread  that Haruki  was  a   burakumin,  though  he  wasn’t.  Then  it  was  discovered  that Haruki  had  a  younger  brother  with  a  head  shaped  like  a  dented  summer melon. Even as a Japanese, it had been difficult for Haruki’s mother to find a  better  place  for  them  to  live,  because  many  of  the  Japanese  landlords thought  the  family  was  cursed.  Haruki  did  not  have  a  father;  this  would have been understandable if his father had died in the war as a soldier, but the truth was that at Haruki’s brother’s birth, the father had taken one look at the child and left. 

Unlike Mozasu, Haruki cared deeply about fitting in and tried very hard, but even the kids with the lowest social status wouldn’t give him a chance. 

He was treated like a diseased animal. The teachers, who followed the cues of  the  student  leaders,  kept  their  distance  from  Haruki.  The  new  boy  had been hoping that this school might be different from his old one in Kyoto, but he saw that he didn’t have a chance here, either. 

At lunchtime, Haruki sat at the end of the long table with two seat gaps around him like an invisible parenthesis while the other boys in their dark woolen uniforms stuck together like a tight row of black corn kernels. Not far  from  this  table,  Mozasu,  who  always  sat  alone,  watched  the  new  boy trying  to  say  something  now  and  then  to  the  group  of  boys,  though,  of course, Haruki never got a reply. 

After a month of this, Mozasu finally said something to him in the boys’

washroom. 

“Why do you try to make those kids like you?” Mozasu asked. 

“What choice do I have?” Haruki replied. 

“You can tell them to fuck off and get a life of your own.” 

“And what kind of life do you have?” Haruki asked. He didn’t mean to be rude; he just wanted to know if there was an alternative. 

“Listen, if people don’t like you, it’s not always your fault. My brother told me that.” 

“You have a brother?” 

“Yeah. He works for Hoji-san, you know, the landlord.” 

“Is your brother the young guy in the glasses?” Haruki asked. Hoji-san was their landlord, too. 

Mozasu nodded, smiling. He was proud of Noa, who cut an impressive figure in the neighborhood. Everyone respected him. 

“I better go back to class,” Haruki said. “I’ll get in trouble if I’m late.” 

“You’re  a  pussy,”  Mozasu  said.  “Do  you  really  give  two  shits  if  the teacher yells at you? Kara-sensei is an even bigger pussy than you are.” 

Haruki gulped. 

“If  you  want,  I’ll  let  you  sit  with  me  during  recess,”  Mozasu  said.  He had never made such an offer before, but he didn’t think he could bear it if Haruki tried to talk to those assholes one more time and was rejected. In a strange way, just watching his efforts was painful and embarrassing. 

“Truly?” Haruki said, smiling. 

Mozasu nodded, and even when they were men, neither one ever forgot how they became friends. 

11

October 1955

Mozasu kept a photograph of the wrestler Rikidozan taped to the inside lid  of  his  trunk,  where  he  kept  his  special  things  like  his  favorite  comics, old coins, and his father’s eyeglasses. Unlike the Korean wrestler, Mozasu did  not  like  to  get  too  close  to  his  opponent  and  tussle  for  too  long. 

Rikidozan  was  known  for  his  famous  karate  chop,  and  similarly,  Mozasu had deadly aim with his strikes. 

Over the years, he had hit many different kinds of boys: He had hit them when they called him names; when they picked on his friend Haruki; and when they hassled his mother or grandmother at their confectionery stall at Tsuruhashi  Station.  By  this  time,  Sunja  had  gotten  used  to  the  notes  and visits  from  teachers,  counselors,  and  angry  parents.  There  was  little  she could do to stop her son from fighting, and she was terrified that he would get  into  serious  trouble  or  argue  with  the  wrong  boy.  After  each  incident, Yoseb and Noa would speak to him, and the fighting would stop for a while. 

Nevertheless, once incited, Mozasu would pound anyone who deserved it. 

When  Sunja  asked  him  what  happened,  she  could  always  expect  two things from him: a sincere apology to her and his family for bringing them shame, and the defense that he didn’t start it. Sunja believed him. By nature, her boy, who was sixteen, was not violent. He avoided fights when he could and for as long as he could, but when things got bad, he would put a stop to the  harassment  with  a  quick,  effective  punch  to  the  instigator’s  face. 

Mozasu had broken the noses of several boys and blackened as many eyes. 

By  now,  only  a  stubborn  fool  or  a  new  bully  at  school  would  bother Mozasu.  Even  the  teachers  respected  the  boy’s  physical  authority,  and everyone  knew  that  he  did  not  abuse  his  power  and  preferred  to  be  left alone. 

To  keep  him  out  of  trouble,  Mozasu  was  required  to  go  to  the confectionery stand after school. Kyunghee stayed at home with Yoseb, and Noa  wanted  Mozasu  to  help  their  mother  and  grandmother.  When  the family had enough money to buy a store, it was hoped that Mozasu would help  his  mother  and  grandmother  run  it.  Mozasu  did  not  want  to  do  this. 

Working  in  the  market  was  women’s  work,  and  though  the  boy  respected the women, he did not want to make candy or sell  taiyaki for the rest of his life. 

For  now,  he  did  not  mind  helping  his  mother  and  grandmother  by fetching more coal for the box stove beneath the  taiyaki griddle and candy burner.  At  the  end  of  the  day,  Sunja  and  Yangjin  were  relieved  to  have  a strong boy to push the carts home, since they had been working since dawn. 

However,  between  the  hours  of  four  and  seven,  there  wasn’t  enough  for Mozasu to do, because Sunja and Yangjin were able to cook the sweets and handle the customers without him. It was never that busy then. 

It was a late fall afternoon, when business was exceedingly slow and the market women were busy talking with each other since there were so few customers; Mozasu made excuses about getting some  gimbap on the other side  of  the  market,  and  no  one  seemed  to  mind.  Mozasu  went  to  see Chiyaki, the girl who sold socks. 

She was an eighteen-year-old Japanese orphan whose parents had died in the  war.  She  lived  and  worked  with  her  elderly  grandparents,  who  owned the  large  sock  store.  Petite  and  curvy,  Chiyaki  was  a  flirt.  She  didn’t  like other girls very much and preferred the company of the boys who worked in the market. Chiyaki teased Mozasu because she was two years older than he was, but of all the boys she liked, she thought he was the most handsome. It was  a  pity,  she  thought,  that  he  was  Korean,  because  her  grandparents would disown her if she dated him. They both knew this, but there was no harm in talking. 

When  Chiyaki’s  grandparents  went  home  in  the  afternoon  and  left  her alone to manage and close the shop, Mozasu or other boys came by to keep

her company. Chiyaki had quit school years before because she hated all the stuck-up girls who ruled the school. Besides, her grandparents couldn’t see the point in her finishing. They were arranging her marriage to the tatami maker’s second son, who Chiyaki thought was boring. Chiyaki liked sharp dressers who talked a good game. Despite her interest in boys, she was very innocent  and  had  never  done  anything  with  a  boy.  She  would  inherit  her grandparents’ store, and she was pretty enough to get a guy to take her to a café if she wanted. Her value was obvious, and what she liked best was to make a man give her his devotion. 

When Mozasu knocked on the doorframe of the stall and handed her his grandmother’s famous  taiyaki, still warm from the griddle, Chiyaki smiled and licked her lips. She smelled it appreciatively at first, then took a little bite. 

“Oishi!  Oishi!  Mo-san,  thank  you  so  much,”  she  said.  “A  handsome young man who can make sweets. You are perfect,  nee?” 

Mozasu smiled. She was adorable; there was no one like her. She had a reputation  for  talking  to  a  lot  of  guys,  but  he  still  enjoyed  being  in  her company. Also, he’d never seen her with another guy, so he didn’t know if the  rumors  were  true.  She  had  a  cute  figure  and  wore  a  berry-colored lipstick, which made her small mouth look delicious. 

“How’s business?” he asked. 

“Not bad. I don’t care. I know we made enough for the week, because Grandfather said so.” 

“The  sandal  lady  is  looking  at  us,”  Mozasu  said.  Watanabe-san  owned the  store  opposite  Chiyaki’s,  and  she  was  best  friends  with  Chiyaki’s grandmother. 

“That  old  bat.  I  hate  her.  She’s  going  to  tell  Grandmother  about  me again, but I don’t care.” 

“Are you going to get in trouble for talking to me?” 

“No. I’ll only get in trouble if I keep letting you give me sweets,” she said.

Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

“Well, I’ll stop then.” 

“Iyada!” Chiyaki took another bite of her cake and shook her head like a willful little girl. 

They  both  looked  up  when  a  young  man  dressed  like  an  office  worker stopped  in  front  of  the  shop.  Chiyaki  gestured  to  the  empty  stool  in  the

corner  of  the  shop,  and  Mozasu  sat  down  and  busied  himself  with  the newspaper. 

“May I help you, sir?” Chiyaki asked the man. He had been by earlier when her grandparents were there, but had returned. “Did you want to see those black socks again?” 

“You remember me?” the man said excitedly. 

“Sure. You were here this morning.” 

“A pretty girl like you remembered me. I like that. I’m glad I came back for you.” 

Mozasu looked up from the paper, then looked down again. 

“How many would you like?” 

“How many do you have?” 

“At  least  twenty  pairs  your  size,”  she  said.  Sometimes  a  person  would buy  ten  pairs.  Once,  a  mother  bought  two  boxes  for  her  son  who  was  at university. 

“I’ll take two, but I’ll take more if you put them on me.” 

Mozasu  folded  the  paper  and  glanced  at  the  man,  who  didn’t  seem  to notice his irritation. 

“I’ll wrap up these two, then,” Chiyaki said. 

“What’s your name?” he asked. 

“Chiyaki.” 

“I have a cousin with that name. Gosh, you are very beautiful. You got a boyfriend?” 

Chiyaki got quiet. 

“No? I think you should be my girlfriend then.” The man put money in her hand and held it. 

Chiyaki smiled at him. She had dealt with this sort of fellow before, and she knew what he was implying. She pretended not to understand. Mozasu was  jealous,  but  she  didn’t  mind.  She  stuck  out  her  chest  a  little.  In  the bathhouse,  the  older  women  always  stared  at  her  high,  round  breasts  and told her she was lucky. 

The  man  stared  exactly  where  Chiyaki  wanted  him  to  and  said,  “Nice. 

When can I pick you up tonight? I’ll buy you some yakitori.” 

“You can’t,” she said, putting the money away in the cashbox. “You’re too old for me.” 

“You little tease.” 

“You’re not my type,” Chiyaki said, unafraid. 

“You’re too young to have a type. I make good money, and I know how to fuck.” The man pulled her to him and put his hands on her behind and squeezed  her.  “Nice  and  full  back  there.  Good  tits,  too.  Close  the  shop. 

Let’s go.” 

Mozasu got up from his chair quietly and walked over to the man. He hit him square in the mouth as hard as he could. The man fell over and blood poured down his lip. From the pain in his knuckles, Mozasu knew that he had loosened some of the man’s teeth. 

“You should take the socks and go home now,” he said. 

The man stared at the blood on his blue shirt and trousers as if the blood belonged to someone else. 

“I’m calling the police,” he said. 

“Go  ahead,  call  the  police,”  Chiyaki  said  to  the  man.  She  waved frantically to the sandal lady, who was now rushing over. 

“Mo-san, go now,” she said. “Hurry, get out. Go. I’ll deal with this.” 

Mozasu walked briskly toward the confection stand. 

The police found him in no time. Only a few minutes before, Mozasu had come  back  to  the  stall  with  blood  on  his  hand  and  told  his  mother  and grandmother what had happened with Chiyaki. 

The police officer confirmed the story. 

“Your  son  hit  a  gentleman  who  was  buying  some  socks.  This  sort  of behavior  warrants  an  explanation.  The  young  lady  said  that  that  man  was trying  to  molest  her  and  your  son  was  protecting  her,  but  the  customer denies it,” the officer said. 

Goro-san, the pachinko parlor owner, who was heading to the stand for his afternoon snack, rushed toward them when he saw the policeman. 

“Hello, officer.” He winked at Sunja. “Is everything okay?” Goro asked. 

Mozasu  sat  on  the  old  wooden  stool  by  the  cart,  looking  guilty  for troubling his mother and grandmother. 

“Mozasu was defending a young lady who works at the sock store from a man who grabbed her. Mozasu hit him in the face,” Sunja said calmly. She kept her head high and refused to apologize for fear of admitting guilt on

his behalf. Her heart was pounding so hard that she thought they could hear it. “He was only trying to help.” 

Yangjin nodded firmly and patted Mozasu’s back. 

“Maji?” Goro said, laughing. “Is that right, officer?” 

“Well,  that’s  what  the  young  lady  said  in  the  shop,  and  Watanabe-san agreed with her version of the events. The man who was hit denies it, but I’ve  heard  from  some  other  store  owners  that  he  is  a  creep  who  often bothers  the  younger  girls  who  work  here.”  The  police  officer  shrugged. 

“Nevertheless,  the  man  thinks  his  jaw  is  broken.  His  two  lower  teeth  are loose. I wanted to warn the young man that he can’t just hit people even if they’re wrong. He should have called the police.” 

At this, Mozasu nodded. He had been in trouble before, but no one had ever called the police. All his life, he had known about his father, who had been  wrongfully  imprisoned.  Lately,  Noa  was  warning  him  that  since  the Koreans in Japan were no longer citizens, if you got in trouble, you could be deported. Noa had told him that no matter what, Mozasu had to respect the police and be very deferential even if they were rude or wrong. Only a month  ago,  Noa  had  said  a  Korean  had  to  be  extra  good.  Once  again, Mozasu felt bad for messing up and dreaded the look of disappointment that would surely appear on Noa’s face. 

Goro considered the boy and Sunja, one of his favorite  ajumma s in the market. 

“Officer, I know this family. They’re very hardworking, and Mozasu is a good  kid.  He  won’t  get  in  trouble  again.  Right,  Mozasu?”  Goro  stared directly at Mozasu. 

“Hai,” Mozasu replied. 

The officer repeated his speech about how citizens should never take the law  into  their  own  hands,  and  Mozasu,  Sunja,  and  Goro  nodded  as  if  the officer  were  the  Emperor  himself.  After  he  left,  Goro  lightly  smacked Mozasu in the back of head with his felt hat. Mozasu winced, but of course it hadn’t hurt. 

“What are you going to do with this boy?” Goro asked the women, both exasperated and amused. 

Sunja looked at her hands. She had tried everything she could, and now she had to ask a stranger. Yoseb and Noa would be angry with her, but she had to try something else besides what they were doing now. 

“Could  you  help  him?”  Sunja  asked.  “Could  he  work  for  you?  You wouldn’t have to pay him very much—” 

Goro  waved  her  away  and  shook  his  head  and  turned  his  attention  to Mozasu. That was all he needed to hear. 

“Listen,  you’re  going  to  quit  school  tomorrow  morning  and  start working  for  me.  Your  mother  doesn’t  need  this  shit.  After  you  tell  the school that you’re done, you’re going to head to my shop, and you’re going to  work  very  hard.  I’m  going  to  pay  you  what  you  deserve.  I  don’t  steal from  my  employees.  You  work,  you  get  paid.  You  got  it?  And  stay  away from the sock girl. She’s trouble.” 

“Does your parlor need a boy?” Sunja asked. 

“Sure,  but  no  fighting.  That’s  not  the  only  way  to  be  a  man,”  he  said, feeling sorry for the kid who didn’t have a father. “Being a man means you know how to control your temper. You have to take care of your family. A good man does that. Okay?” 

“Sir, you are gracious to give him a chance. I know he’ll work—” 

“I  can  see  that,”  Goro  said  to  Sunja,  smiling.  “We’ll  make  him  a pachinko boy and keep him off the streets.” 

Mozasu got up from his stool and bowed to his new boss. 

12

March 1956

Goro was a fat and glamorous Korean, notably popular with beautiful women.  His  mother  had  been  an  abalone  diver  in  Jeju  Island,  and  in  the neighborhood of Ikaino where Goro lived in a modest stand-alone house by himself,  there  was  talk  of  Goro  having  once  been  an  agile  and  powerful swimmer.  That  said,  it  was  rather  difficult  to  imagine  him  doing  much beyond telling funny stories and eating the tasty snacks he liked to fix for himself  in  his  kitchen.  There  was  something  plush  and  sensual  about  his thickly rounded arms and swollen belly; it might have been the smoothness of his clear, tawny skin, or the way he fit into a well-made suit, resembling a self-satisfied seal gliding across a city street. He was a good talker—the sort of man who could sell lumber to a woodcutter. Though he made plenty of money from his three pachinko parlors, he lived simply and preferred to avoid expensive habits. He was known for being generous with women. 

For  six  months,  Mozasu  had  been  working  for  Goro  in  his  main pachinko parlor, doing whatever was needed. In that time, the sixteen-year-old  had  learned  more  about  the  world  than  in  all  his  years  of  school. 

Making money was ten times easier and more pleasant than trying to stuff the kanji he had no use for into his head. It was a tremendous relief to forget the dry books and exams. At work, nearly everyone was Korean, so nothing stupid  was  said  about  his  background.  At  school,  Mozasu  hadn’t  thought that  the  taunts  had  bothered  him  much,  but  when  the  mean  remarks  had

utterly  disappeared  from  his  daily  life,  he  realized  how  peaceful  he  could feel. He hadn’t had a single fight since he’d started working for Goro. 

Each Saturday evening, Mozasu handed his pay envelope to his mother who,  in  turn,  gave  him  an  allowance.  She  used  what  she  needed  for  the household  expenses,  but  she  was  saving  as  much  as  she  could,  because Mozasu wanted to be his own boss one day. Each morning, Mozasu rushed to work and stayed as late as he could keep his eyes open; he was happy just  to  sweep  up  the  cigarette  butts  or  to  wash  the  dirty  teacups  when Kayoko, the kitchen girl, was busy. 

It  was  a  mild  morning  in  March,  only  a  couple  of  hours  after  dawn. 

Mozasu ducked into the back door of the shop and found Goro setting up the  pins  on  his  chosen  machine.  Each  day,  before  the  store  opened,  Goro would gently tap a few straight pins on the vertical pachinko machines with his tiny rubber-coated hammer. He was tapping the pins very, very slightly to  alter  the  course  of  the  metal  balls  to  affect  the  machine’s  payout.  You never  knew  which  machine  Goro  would  choose,  or  which  direction  Goro would  direct  the  pins.  There  were  other  pachinko  parlors  in  the  area  that had decent businesses, but Goro was the most successful, because he had a kind of touch—a true feel for the pins. The minuscule adjustments he made were  sufficiently  frustrating  to  the  regular  customers  who’d  studied  the machines before closing hours for better payouts in the morning, yet there was just enough predictability to produce attractive windfalls, drawing the customers  back  to  try  their  luck  again  and  again.  Goro  was  teaching Mozasu how to tap the pins, and for the first time in his life, Mozasu had been told that he was a good student. 

“Good morning, Goro-san,” Mozasu said, running into the shop. 

“Early  again,  Mozasu.  Good  for  you.  Kayoko  has  made  some  chicken rice; you should eat some breakfast. You’re a big kid, but you need to fill out  some  more.  Women  like  to  have  something  to  grab  on  to!”  Goro laughed heartily, raising his eyebrows. “Isn’t that so?” 

Mozasu  smiled,  not  minding  the  teasing.  Goro-san  talked  to  him  as  if Mozasu, too, had many women when in fact, he’d never once been with a girl. 

“My  mother  made  soup  this  morning,  so  I  already  ate.  Thank  you.” 

Mozasu sat down beside his boss. 

“How is your mother?” 

“Good, good.” 

Despite  Noa’s  strict  disapproval  of  Mozasu  working  in  a  pachinko parlor,  Sunja  had  relented  in  the  end.  She  had  allowed  him  to  work  with Goro,  a  widely  respected  man  in  Ikaino.  Mozasu  had  fought  against  the other schoolboys so often that she’d feared for his safety and let him leave school for good. Mozasu would never finish school, but Noa was still trying to get into Waseda, and this was the family consolation—at least one of the boys would be educated like their father. 

“How’s her business? Sugar is an addictive substance. Good for making money,  nee?” He laughed while tapping gently at one pin then another. 

Mozasu  nodded.  He  was  proud  of  the  confectionery  stall  his  mother, aunt,  and  grandmother  ran  in  the  open  market  by  the  train  station.  They wanted  to  have  a  proper  shop  of  their  own,  but  they’d  have  to  wait  until they had the money to buy the building, because no one would rent good locations  to  Koreans.  Mozasu  wanted  to  make  enough  money  to  pay  for Noa’s tutoring and to buy his mother a beautiful shop. 

Goro handed Mozasu the hammer. 

“Try it.” 

Mozasu tapped the pins while Goro watched him. 

“So,  last  night,  I  met  my  lady  friend  Miyuki,  and  we  drank  too  much. 

Mozasu, don’t be like me and spend all your free time with fast girls,” Goro said, smiling. “Well, unless they are very pretty. Ha.” 

“Miyuki-san is pretty,” Mozasu said. 

“Soo nee.  Beautiful  tits  and  a  stomach  like  a  mermaid.  Women  are  so tasty.  Like  candy!  I  don’t  know  how  I’ll  ever  settle  down,”  Goro  said. 

“Then  again,  I  don’t  see  why  I  should.  You  see,  Mozasu,  I  don’t  have  a mother  or  a  father  anymore,  and  though  this  makes  me  sad,  no  one  cares enough for me to get married and is willing to arrange it.” He nodded, not looking at all troubled by this. 

“And who were you out with last night?” Goro asked. 

Mozasu smiled. 

“You know I was here until the closing. Then I went home.” 

“So you didn’t even chase Kayoko around the kitchen?” 

“No.” Mozasu laughed. 

“Ah, yes, I suppose that was me. Poor girl. She is so very ticklish. Not bad  looking  and  will  one  day  have  a  fine  figure,  but  for  now,  she  is  too

young.  One  day,  someone  will  buy  her  some  rouge  and  powder,  and  she will leave us. And so this is the way of women.” 

Mozasu  couldn’t  understand  why  his  boss  would  be  interested  in  the kitchen girl when he regularly escorted actresses and dancers. 

“Kayoko  is  perfectly  suitable  for  tickling,  however.  She  has  a  cute laugh.”  Goro  knocked  against  Mozasu’s  knee  with  his  own.  “You  know, Mozasu, I like having you kids here. It makes this place feel more jolly.” 

Goro  kept  Mozasu  at  the  main  shop  because  he  had  a  wonderful  energy about  him.  Goro  could  now  afford  to  hire  enough  employees  in  all  his shops. It wasn’t that long ago that, as a new owner, he did the same work Mozasu did. Goro looked up and down at the boy and frowned. 

Mozasu looked at his boss, puzzled. 

“You  wear  the  same  white  shirt  and  black  trousers  each  day.  You  look clean,  but  you  look  like  a  janitor.  You  have  two  shirts  and  two  pairs  of trousers. Isn’t that so?” Goro said this kindly. 

“Yes,  sir.”  Mozasu  glanced  down.  His  mother  had  ironed  his  shirt  the night  before.  He  didn’t  look  bad,  but  Goro-san  was  right—he  didn’t  look important. There was no extra money for clothing. After food, tutoring, and transportation, Uncle Yoseb’s doctor’s bills ate up all their spare cash. He’d been getting worse and remained in bed most of the day. 

“You need some more clothes. Let’s go.” Goro shouted, “Kayo-chan, I’m going  to  go  out  with  Mozasu  for  a  few  minutes.  Don’t  let  anyone  in. 

Okay?” 

“Yes, sir,” Kayoko shouted from the kitchen. 

“But  I  need  to  put  the  trays  of  balls  out  and  sweep  the  front.  The machines need to be cleaned, and I wanted to help Kayoko with the hand towels—” Mozasu listed his morning duties, but his boss was already at the door. 

“Mozasu,  come  on!  I  don’t  have  all  day.  You  can’t  look  like  that anymore!” he shouted, while smiling, not the least bit ruffled by the boy’s confusion. 

The woman who answered the small wooden door was surprised to see the tall boy standing by her customer, Goro-san. 

Mozasu recognized Haruki’s mother immediately. He’d never been to his friend’s  house  before  but  had  met  her  on  the  street  several  times,  and Haruki had introduced her to him. 

“Totoyama-san! Hello.” Mozasu bowed deep from the waist. 

“Mozasu-san,  hello.  Welcome.  I’d  heard  that  you  were  working  for Goro-san.” 

Goro smiled. “He is a good boy. I’m sorry to come so early, Totoyama-san, but Mozasu needs a few things.” 

As  Mozasu  entered,  he  was  surprised  by  the  smallness  of  the  living quarters. The space was a third the size of his house. It was basically one small room divided by a wall-to-wall screen—the front part held the sewing machine,  dressmakers’  dummies,  work  table,  and  fabrics.  Some  sort  of sandalwood incense covered the shoyu and mirin smells from cooking. The room  was  meticulously  clean.  It  was  hard  to  believe  that  Haruki  lived somewhere so cramped with his mother and brother. Seeing this made him miss his friend more. Mozasu had not seen Haruki since he left school and started work. 

“Mozasu  is  going  to  be  my  new  morning  foreman.  My  youngest  one yet.” 

“Ehh?” Mozasu said out loud. 

“But a foreman cannot look like the boy who cleans the machines and passes out hand towels and cups of tea,” Goro said. “Totoyama-san, please make him two proper jackets and matching trousers.” 

Totoyama  nodded  gravely,  unspooling  her  measuring  tape  to  gauge  the size of his shoulders and arms. With a stubby pencil, she took notes on a pad made out of used wrapping paper. 

“Mama! Mama! Can I come out now?” 

It was the voice of a larger male but with the pleading tone of a small boy. 

“Excuse  me.  My  son  is  curious.  We  don’t  usually  have  customers  so early in the morning.” 

Goro-san waved her away, letting her check on her son. 

When she left the room, Goro made a sad face. “The boy is—” 

Mozasu nodded, because he knew about Haruki’s younger brother. It had been  almost  six  months  since  he  had  last  seen  Haruki,  who  was  still  in school. Haruki wanted to become a police officer. Neither had realized that

school had made their relationship possible until one of them left; there’d been no chance to see him since Mozasu worked all the time. 

The sliding walls between the rooms were made of paper and thin slats of wood, and Goro and Mozasu could hear everything. 

“Daisuke-chan, Mama will be right back,  nee? I’m in the next room. You can hear me,  nee?” 

“Mama, is brother back home from school?” 

“No, no, Daisuke-chan. Haruki left only an hour ago. We must wait for him  patiently.  He  will  not  be  home  until  much  later.  Mama  has  to  make some  jackets  for  Haruki’s  good  friend.  Can  you  stay  here  and  do  your puzzle?” 

“Is this Mozasu-san?” 

Startled at hearing his name, Mozasu glanced at the closed screen door. 

“I  want  to  meet  him,  Mama.  This  is  the  Korean  boy.  Can  I  meet  him, please? Brother said Mozasu curses. I want to hear that!” Daisuke burst out laughing. 

Goro patted Mozasu’s back as if he was trying to assure him somehow. 

Mozasu could feel Goro’s sympathy and kindness. 

“Oh,  Mama!  Mama!  I  want  to  meet  the  Korean  friend.  Oh,  Mama, please?” 

Suddenly, it got quiet, and Totoyama’s voice lowered to a low murmur like  a  bird  cooing.  “Daisuke-chan,  Daisuke-chan,  Daisuke-chan,”  she chanted. Haruki’s mother repeated his name until the boy quieted. 

“You should stay here and do your puzzle and help Mama. Okay? You are my good child. Haruki will be home in a few hours. He will want to see your progress on your puzzles.” 

“Yes,  Mama,  yes.  I  will  play  with  my  top  first.  Then  I  will  do  my puzzles. Can we have rice today, do you think? If we have customers, can we have rice? Sometimes you buy rice when we have customers. I want a big rice ball, Mama.” 

“Later,  Daisuke-chan.  We  will  talk  later.  Daisuke-chan,  Daisuke-chan, Daisuke-chan,” she murmured. 

Totoyama  returned  to  the  room  and  apologized.  Goro  said  it  was nothing. For the first time, Mozasu saw that Goro could look troubled. He smiled  a  lot  at  Totoyama,  but  his  downward-sloping  eyes  showed  his anguish at the sight of her stoic yet gentle face. 

“Maybe you should make the boy two jackets, two sets of trousers, and a proper  winter  coat.  He  is  always  wearing  some  shabby  thing.  I  want  my customers to see that the employees of my shops are neat and well dressed.” 

Goro-san handed her some bills, and Mozasu turned away. He looked for signs of his friend in the tiny room, but there were no photographs, books, or  images.  There  was  a  portrait-sized  mirror  on  the  wall  beside  the curtained dressing area. 

“I  will  send  Kayoko  later  today  so  you  can  make  her  something  that matches Mozasu’s uniform. I think they should wear a striped tie or some striped  thing  that  matches  each  other.  I  saw  that  in  a  Tokyo  parlor  last month. She should wear a neat dress with an apron. Maybe the apron could be striped. What do you think? Well, I leave that to you. She should have two or three uniforms made. They should be sturdy.” Goro peeled off some more bills and put them in her hands. 

Totoyama bowed and bowed again. “It is too much,” she said, looking at the money. 

Goro gestured to Mozasu. “We should go back now. The customers will be itchy to touch their machines!” 

“Goro-san, I shall have the jackets and trousers ready by the end of the week. I will work on the coat last. Mozasu-san will come again to try on the jacket, please. Can you come by in three days?” 

Mozasu glanced at Goro-san, who nodded firmly. 

“Come along, Mozasu. We mustn’t keep the customers waiting.” 

Mozasu followed his boss out the door, unable to find out anything about his friend, who would be suffering through morning classes about now. 

Totoyama bowed when they left and remained at the threshold until they turned the corner and could no longer see her. She shut the door tight and locked the door behind her. There would be money for rent and food that month. Totoyama sat down in front of her door and cried from relief. 

13

1957

There has to be a way to raise that money,” Kyunghee said. 

“We have whatever’s left from the savings for the shop,” Yangjin said. 

“It’s mostly gone,” Sunja whispered. Trying to save money while paying medical bills was like pouring oil into a broken jar. 

The  women  were  speaking  in  low  voices  in  the  kitchen  for  fear  of waking Yoseb. His latest skin infection made him itch terribly and kept him from  resting.  He  had  only  just  gone  to  bed  after  taking  a  large  draft  of Chinese medicine. The herbalist had given him a very strong dose this time, and it had worked. After all these years, the women were used to paying a lot for the medications, but this concoction had been shockingly expensive. 

Regular medicines no longer worked for his ailments, and he continued to suffer a great deal. Mozasu, who gave his full pay envelope each week to his mother, said that whatever they had left after living expenses should go toward  the  best  possible  care  for  Uncle  Yoseb.  Noa  felt  the  same  way. 

Despite the family’s thrift and diligence, the savings seemed to vanish with each visit to the pharmacy. How would they pay for Waseda? 

At  last,  Noa  had  passed  the  entrance  exam.  This  should  have  been  a good day, perhaps the greatest day in the family’s life, but they didn’t know how to pay even a portion of his first tuition bill. Also, the school was in Tokyo, and he would need room and board in the most expensive city in the country. 

Noa intended to continue working for Hoji-san up until almost the first day  of  school,  then  get  a  job  in  Tokyo  while  going  to  university.  Sunja didn’t know how that could be possible. Koreans didn’t get jobs so easily, and they knew no one in Tokyo. Noa’s boss, Hoji-san, was furious that his best bookkeeper was going to quit working to study something as useless as English literature. Hoji-san would never help Noa get a job in Tokyo. 

Kyunghee  thought  they  should  buy  another  cart  and  set  up  in  another part  of  town  to  try  to  double  their  earnings,  but  Yoseb  could  not  be  left alone. He could no longer walk, and the muscles in his legs had atrophied so  much  that  what  had  once  been  thick,  powerful  calves  were  now  bony stalks sheathed with scabs. 

He  was  not  asleep,  and  he  could  hear  them.  The  women  were  in  the kitchen  worrying  about  Noa’s  tuition.  They  were  worried  when  he  was studying  for  his  exams,  and  now  that  he  had  finally  passed,  they  were worried  about  how  they  would  pay.  Somehow,  they  had  to  live  without Noa’s salary, come up with the cost of the boy’s education, and pay for his medicines. It would have been better if he were dead. Everyone knew it. As a young man, the only thing Yoseb had wanted to do was to take care of his family, and now that he was helpless to do so, he could not even die to help them. The worst thing had happened: He was eating up his family’s future. 

Back home, in the olden days, he could have asked someone to carry him off to the mountains to die, perhaps to be eaten by tigers. He lived in Osaka, and there were no wild animals here—only expensive herbalists and doctors who  could  not  help  him  get  well,  but  rather  keep  him  from  just  enough agony to fear death more while hating himself. 

What surprised him was that as he felt closer to death, he felt the terror of death, its very finality. There were so many things he had failed to do. 

There were even more things he should never have done. He thought of his parents,  whom  he  should  never  have  left;  his  brother,  whom  he  should never  have  brought  to  Osaka;  and  he  thought  of  the  job  in  Nagasaki  he should  never  have  taken.  He  had  no  children  of  his  own.  Why  did  God bring him this far? He was suffering, and in a way, he could manage that; but he had caused others to suffer, and he did not know why he had to live now and recall the series of terrible choices that had not looked so terrible at the time. Was that how it was for most people? Since the fire, in the few moments  when  he  felt  clear  and  grateful  to  breathe  without  pain,  Yoseb

wanted  to  see  the  good  in  his  life,  but  he  couldn’t.  He  lay  on  his  well-laundered  pallet,  dwelling  on  the  mistakes  that  seemed  so  obvious  in hindsight. He was no longer angry at Korea or Japan; most of all, he was angry about his own foolishness. He prayed that God would forgive him for being an ungrateful old man. 

Softly, he called out “Yobo.” He didn’t want to wake the boys, who were sleeping in the back room, and Changho, who slept in the room by the front door. Yoseb tapped the floor gently in case Kyunghee could not hear him. 

When  he  saw  her  at  the  threshold,  he  asked  her  to  bring  Sunja  and Yangjin. 

The three women sat on the floor by his pallet. 

“You can sell my tools first,” he said. “They’re worth something. Maybe they’ll  pay  for  his  books  and  his  moving  fees.  You  should  sell  all  the jewelry you have. That will help, too.” 

The women nodded. Among the three of them, they had two gold rings left. 

“Mozasu should ask his boss, Goro-san, for an advance against his salary equal to Noa’s tuition, room, and board. And the three of you and he can work  down  the  debt.  During  the  school  breaks,  Noa  can  find  whatever temporary  jobs  he  can  get  and  save.  The  boy  has  to  go  to  Waseda.  He deserves to go. Even if no one hires Koreans here, with his degree he can go back to Korea and work for a better salary. Or move to the United States. 

He’ll know how to speak English. We have to think of his education as an investment.” 

He  wanted  to  say  more.  He  wanted  to  apologize  for  not  providing  for them and for the expense he caused them, but he couldn’t say these things now. 

“The Lord will provide,” Kyunghee said. “He’s always taken care of our every need. When the Lord saved your life, he saved our lives.” 

“Send Mozasu to me when he comes home. I’ll tell him that he must ask for an advance from Goro-san so he can pay for the tuition.” 

Sunja shook her head slightly. 

“Noa won’t allow his younger brother to pay for his tuition,” she said. 

“He’s  already  told  me  so.”  She  didn’t  look  at  him  while  speaking.  “Koh Hansu has said that he would pay for the tuition and board. Even if Mozasu got an advance—” 

“No. That’s the foolish talk of an unthinking woman! You can’t take that bastard’s money! It’s filthy.” 

“Shhh,” Kyunghee said gently. “Please don’t get upset.” She didn’t want Kim Changho to hear them talking about his boss. “Noa said that he’ll get a job  in  Tokyo,  and  it’s  true,  he  did  say  that  Mozasu  cannot  pay  for  the tuition. That he’ll manage. You know Noa won’t go if Mozasu pays.” 

“I  should  be  dead,”  Yoseb  said.  “I’d  rather  be  dead  than  listen  to  this. 

How can that boy work and go to a school like Waseda? Impossible. A boy who  studied  hard  like  this  must  go.  I’ll  ask  Goro-san  myself  if  Noa  can borrow the money. I’ll tell Noa that he has to take it from him.” 

“But we don’t know if Goro-san will lend it. And asking him could hurt Mozasu’s  job.  I  don’t  want  to  let  Koh  Hansu  pay  for  the  fees,  either,  but how else? We can make it a loan, and we can pay it back in increments so that Noa doesn’t owe him anything,” Sunja said. 

“Borrowing from Goro-san and hurting Mozasu’s future in pachinko is far  better  than  taking  money  from  Koh  Hansu,”  Yoseb  said  firmly.  “That Koh Hansu is bad. Take money from him for Noa, and there will be no end to him. He wants to control the boy. You know that. For Goro-san, it’s just money.” 

“But why is Goro’s pachinko money cleaner than Koh Hansu’s money? 

Koh Hansu owns construction companies and restaurants. There’s nothing wrong with those things,” Kyunghee said. 

“Shut up.” 

Kyunghee pursed her lips. The Bible said that a wise person must rein in his tongue. Not everything you wanted to say should be said. 

Sunja said nothing as well. She had never wanted anything from Hansu before, but she reasoned that it would be preferable to ask a man who had already  offered  the  money  than  bother  a  total  stranger.  Goro  had  already been  so  gracious  to  Mozasu,  and  Mozasu  was  very  happy  in  his  job.  She didn’t want to bring shame to Mozasu, who had only just started out. The boy had been talking of opening his own parlor one day. Besides, she knew Noa wouldn’t allow Mozasu to borrow that money. Yoseb could insist all he wanted, but Noa would not listen to this. 

“How about Kim Changho? Can he help?” Yangjin asked. 

“That  man  works  for  Koh  Hansu.  Changho  doesn’t  have  that  kind  of money, and if he got it, he would have gotten it from his boss. These debts

are  not  easy,  but  Goro-san  is  the  best  option.  He  won’t  charge  some exorbitant  rate,  or  hurt  Noa.  Mozasu  will  be  fine,”  Yoseb  replied.  “I’m going to rest now.” 

The women left the room and closed the door. 

The  next  day,  Hansu  asked  Noa  to  come  by  his  office  in  Osaka  with  his mother. That same evening, without telling the family, the mother and son went  to  see  Hansu.  The  office  had  two  receptionists,  dressed  in  matching black suits and crisp white shirts, and one of them brought them tea in thin blue porcelain cups on a lacquer tray lined in white gold foil. The waiting area was filled with beautiful floral arrangements. As soon as Hansu’s call ended,  the  older  one  ushered  them  into  Hansu’s  immense,  wood-paneled office. Hansu sat on a tufted black-leather chair behind a mahogany partners desk from England. 

“Congratulations!”  Hansu  said,  getting  up  from  his  big  chair.  “I’m  so glad you could come. We should go have sushi! Can you go now?” 

“No, no, thank you. We have to get home,” Sunja replied. 

Noa  glanced  at  his  mother,  wondering  why  she  wouldn’t  go  to  dinner. 

They  didn’t  have  any  plans.  After  the  meeting,  they  would  likely  just  go back home and eat something simple that Aunt Kyunghee made. 

“I  asked  you  to  come  today  because  I  want  Noa  to  know  that  he  has achieved  something  great.  Not  just  for  himself  or  his  family  but  for  all Koreans. You are going to university! And to Waseda, an excellent Japanese university! You are doing everything a great man can do in his time—you are pursuing your education. So many Koreans could not go to school, but you kept studying and studying. And even when the exams were not good, you persevered. You deserve a great reward! How wonderful! I’m so proud. 

So proud.” Hansu beamed. 

Noa  smiled  shyly.  No  one  had  fussed  nearly  this  much.  Everyone  at home  had  been  happy,  but  mostly  they  had  been  anxious  about  the  cost. 

Noa had been concerned, too, about the money, but he felt that somehow, everything would be okay. He had worked since high school, and he would keep  working  even  at  Waseda.  After  getting  into  Waseda,  he  felt  like  he could do anything. He didn’t mind working in any kind of job as long as he

could go to classes and study. 

“I am sorry to ask this, but a while ago, you had said that you may be able to help Noa with the fees,” Sunja said. “Do you think you could help us?” 

“Umma, no.” Noa flushed. “I can get a job. That’s not why we’re here. 

Kim-san said that Koh-san wanted us to come by to congratulate me.  Nee?” 

Noa  was  surprised  by  his  mother’s  request.  She  didn’t  like  to  ask  for anything. She didn’t even like taking free samples at the bakery. 

“Noa,  I’m  asking  for  a  loan.  We  would  pay  everything  back.  With interest,”  Sunja  said.  She  hadn’t  wanted  to  ask  now,  but  it  was  better  this way, she thought. Now he would know the terms from the beginning. There was no way to do this perfectly, so she had to just say it. “The tuition is due now, and if you could help us, then we can write up a loan paper, and I will stamp  it  with  my   hanko.  I  brought  it.”  Sunja  nodded  for  emphasis.  For  a second, she wondered: What would she do if he said no? 

Hansu laughed and shook his head dismissively. 

“That’s  not  necessary,  and  Noa  need  never  worry  about  tuition,  board, and  fees.  I’ve  already  taken  care  of  it.  As  soon  as  I  heard  the  great  news from Kim Changho, I sent the money to the school. I called my friend in Tokyo and found a good room near the school, which I will take you to see next week. Then I asked Kim Changho to ask you and Noa to come by so I could invite you to dinner. So, now, let’s go eat sushi. The boy deserves a magnificent meal!” 

Hansu  looked  at  Sunja’s  face  with  pleading  in  his  eyes.  He  wanted  so much to celebrate his son’s great accomplishment. 

“You  sent  the  money?  And  found  a  room  in  Tokyo?  Without  my permission? It’s supposed to be a loan,” she said, feeling more anxious. 

“Sir,  it’s  far  too  generous.  My  mother  is  right.  We  should  return  the money to you. I will get a job in Tokyo. Perhaps you can help me with that rather than pay the fees. I’d like to earn it myself. I feel like I can do that.” 

“No. You have to study. You had to take that exam again and again, not because you are not smart. You are very smart. You didn’t have the time to study like a normal student. You took much longer than you needed because you  didn’t  have  schooling  and  you  had  to  work  full  time  to  support  your family.  You  didn’t  have  all  the  proper  tutoring  that  the  average  Japanese middle-class  child  would  have  had.  And  during  the  war,  you  were  in  that

farm  without  any  lessons.  No.  I  will  no  longer  watch  idly  while  you  and your mother pretend that the rules of human performance do not apply to you.  A  hardworking  scholar  should  not  have  to  worry  about  money.  I should have forced my way earlier. Why should it take many more years for you  to  graduate  from  school?  Do  you  want  to  be  an  old  man  by  the  time you finish Waseda? You study and learn as much as you can. I will pay,” 

Hansu said, laughing. “Do it my way. Be smart, Noa. This is what I can do for the next generation as a responsible Korean elder.” 

Noa bowed. 

“Sir, you have been very kind to our family. I am very grateful.” 

Noa looked at his mother, who remained seated quietly by his side. Her hands  twisted  the  handle  of  her  homemade  canvas  bag,  stitched  from Mozasu’s  leftover  coat  material.  He  felt  sorry  for  her,  because  she  was  a proud woman, and this was humiliating for her. He knew she wanted to pay for his tuition. 

“Noa,  can  you  go  outside  and  ask  Mieko-san  to  call  the  restaurant  for us?” Hansu asked. 

Noa  looked  again  at  his  mother,  who  seemed  lost  in  her  heavily upholstered chair. 

“Umma?” 

Sunja glanced up at her son, who was already standing by the door. She could  see  that  he  wanted  to  go  to  dinner  with  Hansu.  The  boy  looked  so handsome and pleased. She couldn’t imagine what this must have meant to him.  Noa  had  not  refused  Hansu.  He  had  already  accepted  the  money, because the boy wanted so much to go to this university. In her mind, she could  hear  Yoseb  yelling  at  her—to  stop  this  now,  that  she  was  a  foolish woman who had not thought this through. But the boy, her first child, was happy. He had done this tremendous, near impossible thing, and she could not imagine unmaking it to the thing it was yesterday, before he had passed

—this  glittering,  brilliant  object  that  could  be  taken  away  at  a  moment’s notice through lack of money. She nodded, and her son understood that they would dine with Hansu. 

When the door closed, and Hansu and Sunja were alone in his office, she tried again:

“I  want  this  to  be  a  loan.  And  I  want  papers  so  I  can  show  Noa  that  I paid for his school.” 

“No, Sunja. This, this I get to do. He’s my son. If you don’t let me do this, I will tell him.” 

“Are you crazy?” 

“No.  Paying  for  his  school  is  nothing  to  me  financially,  but  it  is everything to me as his father.” 

“You’re not his father.” 

“You don’t know what you’re saying,” Hansu said. “He is my child. He has my ambition. He has my abilities. I will not let my own blood rot in the gutters of Ikaino.” 

Sunja gathered her bag and got up. Yoseb was not wrong, and she could not take this back. 

“Let us go then. The boy is waiting outside. He must be hungry,” he said. 

Hansu opened the door and let her out first. 

14

December 1959

On a Saturday morning when the others would be at work, Kyunghee wanted  to  go  to  church.  Missionaries  from  America  who  spoke  Japanese but not Korean were visiting their church, and the minister had asked her to help him greet them since her Japanese was so good. Normally, she couldn’t get  out  of  the  house  because  she  wouldn’t  leave  Yoseb  by  himself,  but Changho offered to watch Yoseb. It wouldn’t be for very long, and Changho wanted to do one last thing for her. 

Changho  sat  cross-legged  on  the  warm  floor  near  Yoseb’s  bedding  to help him do some of the stretches the doctor had recommended. 

“You’ve made up your mind, then?” Yoseb asked. 

“Brother, I should go. It’s time I went home.” 

“Really, tomorrow?” 

“In the morning, I’ll take the train to Tokyo, then head to Niigata from there. The ship leaves next week.” 

Yoseb  said  nothing.  His  face  contorted  a  little  in  pain  as  he  lifted  his right leg toward the ceiling. Changho kept his right hand beneath Yoseb’s thigh to steady him down slowly. They switched to the left leg. 

Yoseb exhaled audibly after doing two more sets. 

“If you wait until I die, then you can take my ashes and bury me there. 

That  would  be  a  good  thing,  I  suppose.  Though  I  think  it  doesn’t  much matter  in  the  end.  You  know,  I  still  believe  in  heaven.  I  believe  in  Jesus, 

even after all this. I suppose being married to Kyunghee will do that. Her faith brought me closer to the Lord. I am not a good man, but I believe that I am saved. My father once said that when you die and go to heaven, you get your body back. I can finally get rid of this one. That will be good. And I feel ready to go home, too.” 

Changho  put  his  right  arm  beneath  Yoseb’s  head,  and  Yoseb  raised  his arms  above  his  head  slowly,  then  lowered  them.  His  arms  were  much stronger than his legs. 

“Brother,  you  can’t  talk  that  way.  It’s  not  time.  You’re  still  here,  and  I can still feel the power in your body.” 

Changho grasped Yoseb’s good hand, which was unmarred by burns. He could feel the man’s delicate bones. How had he survived for so long? 

“And…if  you  wait…if  you  wait  until  I  die,  then  you  can  marry  her,” 

Yoseb said. “But you can’t take her there. I ask that. I ask that of you.” 

“What?” Changho shook his head. 

“I  don’t  trust  the  communists.  I  wouldn’t  want  her  to  go  back  home when  they’re  in  charge.  And  this  can’t  last  forever.  Japan  will  be  a  rich country again soon, and Korea won’t always be divided. You still have your health. You can make money here and take care of my…” Yoseb couldn’t say her name then. 

“I’ve made her suffer so much. She loved me when I was just a boy. I always knew that we’d be together, even when we were kids. She was the most beautiful girl I had ever seen. You know, I’ve never wanted to be with another woman. Ever. Not just because she’s so lovely, but because she’s so good. Never, not once, did she complain about me. And I have not been a husband  to  her  for  such  a  long  time.”  He  sighed.  His  mouth  felt  dry.  “I know you care for her. I trust you. I wish you didn’t work for that thug, but there aren’t that many jobs here. I understand. Why don’t you just wait until I die?” The more he said these things, the more Yoseb felt that it was right. 

“Stay here. I’ll die soon. I feel it. You’re needed here, too. You can’t fix that country. No one can.” 

“Brother, you’re not going to die.” 

“No, I must. We must try to build a nation again. We can’t only think of our own comfort.” Even as Yoseb said this, Changho felt the possibility of being with her again, something he had given up. 

  

As  Kyunghee  walked  home  from  church,  she  saw  Changho  sitting  on  the bench  in  front  of  the  convenience  store,  a  block  from  the  house.  He  was reading a newspaper and drinking juice from a glass bottle. Changho was friendly with the owner, and he liked this quiet spot beneath the tarpaulin awning on the busy intersection. 

“Hello,” she said. Kyunghee was happy to see him. “Is he okay? It’s not easy being cooped up, is it? Thank you so much for watching him. I better go back. You stay.” 

“He’s fine. I just stepped out. Before he went to sleep, he asked me to get him some papers for when he wakes up. He wanted me to get some air.” 

Kyunghee nodded and turned from him to rush home. 

“Sister, I was hoping I’d get a chance to speak with you.” 

“Oh? Let’s go back home. I better start dinner. He’ll be hungry.” 

“Wait. Can you sit with me? Can I get you a juice from the store?” 

“No, no. I’m all right.” She smiled at him and sat down, her hands folded over her lap. She was wearing her winter Sunday coat over her navy wool dress with her nice leather shoes. 

Without delay, Changho told her what her husband said, almost word for word. He was nervous, but he knew he had to do it now. 

“You could come with me. The first ship leaves next week, but we can go later. Korea needs more people who have the energy to rebuild a nation. 

We’re supposed to get our own apartment with all the latest appliances, and we’ll be in our own country. White rice three times a day. We can take his ashes there, and we can visit your parents’ graves. Do a proper  jesa. We can go home. You can be my wife.” 

Stunned,  Kyunghee  said  nothing.  She  could  not  imagine  that  Yoseb would  have  offered  her  to  him,  but  she  could  not  imagine  that  Changho would  lie  to  her.  The  only  thing  that  made  sense  was  that  Yoseb  was worried enough about her to suggest such a plan. After the meeting at the church broke up, she had asked the minister to pray for Changho’s journey and  well-being  in  Pyongyang.  Changho  didn’t  believe  in  God  or Christianity, but Kyunghee had wanted to pray for him, because she didn’t know what else she could do for him. If the Lord watched over him, then she would not worry. 

He had told her that he was leaving only a week ago, and it was difficult to think of him being gone, but it was the right thing. He was a young man who  believed  in  building  a  great  country  for  others.  She  admired  him, because  he  didn’t  even  have  to  go  there.  He  had  a  good  job  and  friends. 

Pyongyang  wasn’t  even  his  home—Changho  was  from  Kyungsangdo.  It was she who was from the North. 

“Is it possible?” he asked. 

“But you said—that you wanted to go. I thought you’d marry someone back home.” 

“But you know that—that I’ve cared. That I do—” 

Kyunghee looked around. The shopkeeper of the convenience store was seated  in  the  back  and  couldn’t  hear  them  over  the  noise  of  his  radio program.  On  the  road,  a  few  cars  and  bicycles  passed  by,  but  not  many, because it was Saturday morning. The red-and-white pinwheels attached to the store awning spun slowly in the light winter breeze. 

“If you said it is possible—” 

“You can’t talk that way,” she said softly. She didn’t want to hurt him. 

All these years, his adoration and kindness had nourished her but had also caused her anguish, because she could not care for him in that way. It was wrong  to  do  so.  “Changho,  you  have  a  future.  You  must  find  a  young woman and have children. There isn’t a day when I don’t feel heartbroken that my husband and I couldn’t have them. I know it was the Lord’s plan for me, but I think you might have some. You’d make a wonderful husband and father. I couldn’t ask you to wait. It would be sinful.” 

“It’s because you don’t want me to wait. Because I would if you told me to.” 

Kyunghee  bit  her  lip.  She  felt  cold  suddenly  and  put  on  her  blue  wool mittens. 

“I have to make dinner.” 

“I leave tomorrow. Your husband said I should wait. Isn’t that what you wanted? For him to give you permission? Wouldn’t that make it okay in the eyes of your god?” 

“It isn’t up to Yoseb to change God’s laws. My husband is alive, and I wouldn’t want to hasten his death. I care for you very much, Changho. You have been the dearest friend to me. I’m not sure if I can bear it when you go, but I know we’re not supposed to be man and wife. To even talk about it

while he is alive cannot be right. I pray that you’ll understand.” 

“No. I don’t understand. I will never understand. How could your faith allow such suffering?” 

“It isn’t just suffering. It isn’t. I pray that you will forgive me. That you will—” 

Changho laid down the juice bottle carefully on the bench and got up. 

“I’m not like you,” he said. “I’m just a man. I don’t want to be holy. I’m a minor patriot.” He left, walking away from the direction of the house and didn’t return until late in the evening when everyone was asleep. 

Early in the morning, when Kyunghee went to the kitchen to get water for Yoseb, she saw that Changho’s room door was open. She looked in, and he was  gone.  The  bedding  had  been  folded  neatly.  Changho  had  never  had many possessions, but the room looked even more empty without his pile of books,  his  extra  pair  of  glasses  resting  on  top  of  them.  The  family  was supposed to have accompanied him to Osaka Station to see him off, but he had taken an earlier train. 

Kyunghee  stood  by  his  door  crying,  when  Sunja  touched  her  arm.  She was wearing her work apron over her nightclothes. 

“He left in the middle of the night. He told me to tell everyone good-bye. 

I only saw him because I got up to make candy.” 

“Why didn’t he wait? Until we could go with him to the train station?” 

“He said he didn’t want to make a fuss. He said he had to go. I tried to make him breakfast, but he said he’d buy something later. That he couldn’t eat.” 

“He wanted to marry me. After Yoseb died. Yoseb had told him that it was okay.” 

“Uh-muh,” Sunja gasped. 

“But that’s not right, is it? He should be with someone young. He has a right  to  have  children.  I  couldn’t  give  him  any.  I  don’t  even  have  blood anymore.” 

“Maybe you’re more important than children.” 

“No. I could not disappoint two men,” she said. “He is a good man.” 

Sunja held her sister-in-law’s hand. 

“You  told  him  no?”  Her  sister-in-law’s  face  was  wet  with  tears,  and Sunja wiped it with a corner of her apron. 

“I have to get water for Yoseb,” Kyunghee said, remembering suddenly why she’d gotten out of bed. 

“Sister,  he  would  not  have  cared  about  children.  He  would  have  been happy to have just been with you. You are like an angel in this world.” 

“No. I’m selfish. Yoseb isn’t.” 

Sunja didn’t understand. 

“It was selfish to keep him here, but I did because he meant so much to me. I prayed every day for the courage to let him go, and I know the Lord wanted me to let him go. It cannot be right to have two men care for you that way and to allow it.” 

Sunja nodded, but it didn’t make sense. Were you supposed to have only one person in your life? Her mother had her father and no one else. Was her person Hansu or Isak? Did Hansu love her or had he just wanted to use her? 

If  love  required  sacrifice,  then  Isak  had  really  loved  her.  Kyunghee  had served  her  husband  faithfully  without  complaint.  There  was  no  one  as kindhearted  and  lovely  as  her  sister-in-law—why  couldn’t  she  have  more than  one  man  love  her?  Why  did  men  get  to  leave  when  they  didn’t  get what they wanted? Or had Changho suffered enough waiting? Sunja wanted her  sister-in-law  to  make  Changho  wait,  but  it  wouldn’t  have  been Kyunghee  if  she  had  made  him  do  so.  Changho  had  loved  someone  who would not betray her husband, and perhaps that was why he had loved her. 

She could not violate who she was. 

Kyunghee  moved  toward  the  kitchen,  and  Sunja  followed,  a  few  steps behind.  Morning  sunlight  broke  through  the  kitchen  window,  and  it  was hard to see straight ahead, but the light cast a glowing outline around her sister-in-law’s slight frame. 

15

Tokyo, 1960

It  took  some  time,  but  after  two  years  at  Waseda,  Noa  finally  felt comfortable  about  his  place  there.  Always  an  excellent  student  with  good habits,  after  a  few  hiccups  and  several  thoughtful  attempts,  Noa  learned how  to  write  English  literature  papers  and  take  university-level  exams. 

University life was glorious in contrast to secondary school, where he had learned  and  memorized  many  things  he  no  longer  valued.  None  of  his requirements even seemed like work; Waseda was pure joy to him. He read as much as he could without straining his eyes, and there was time to read and  write  and  think.  His  professors  at  Waseda  cared  deeply  about  the subjects they taught, and Noa could not understand how anyone could ever complain. 

Hansu had procured for him a well-appointed apartment and gave him a generous allowance, so Noa did not have to worry about housing, money, or food. He lived simply and managed to send some money home each month. 

“Just  study,”  Hansu  had  said.  “Learn  everything.  Fill  your  mind  with knowledge—it’s the only kind of power no one can take away from you.” 

Hansu never told him to study, but rather to learn, and it occurred to Noa that there was a marked difference. Learning was like playing, not labor. 

Noa was able to buy every book he needed for his classes, and when he couldn’t find one at the bookstore, all he had to do was go to the immense university  library,  which  was  deeply  underutilized  by  his  peers.  He  didn’t

understand the Japanese students around him, because they seemed so much more  interested  in  things  outside  of  school  rather  than  learning.  He  knew well  enough  from  schools  past  that  the  Japanese  didn’t  want  much  to  do with Koreans, so Noa kept to himself, no different than when he was a boy. 

There  were  some  Koreans  at  Waseda,  but  he  avoided  them,  too,  because they seemed too political. During one of their monthly lunches, Hansu had said that the leftists were “a bunch of whiners” and the rightists were “plain stupid.”  Noa  was  alone  mostly,  but  he  didn’t  feel  lonely.  Even  after  two years,  he  was  still  in  thrall  with  just  being  at  Waseda,  with  just  having  a quiet room to read in. Like a man starved, Noa filled his mind, ravenous for good  books.  He  read  through  Dickens,  Thackeray,  Hardy,  Austen,  and Trollope, then moved on to the Continent to read through much of Balzac, Zola, and Flaubert, then fell in love with Tolstoy. His favorite was Goethe; he  must  have  read   The  Sorrows  of  Young  Werther  at  least  half  a  dozen times. 

If  he  had  an  embarrassing  wish,  it  was  this:  He  would  be  a  European from a long time ago. He didn’t want to be a king or a general—he was too old for such simple wishes. If anything, he wanted a very simple life filled with nature, books, and perhaps a few children. He knew that later in life, he  also  wanted  to  be  let  alone  to  read  and  to  be  quiet.  In  his  new  life  in Tokyo, he had discovered jazz music, and he liked going to bars by himself and listening to records that the owners would select from bins. Listening to live music was too expensive, but he hoped that one day, when he had a job again, he would be able to go to a jazz club. At the bar, he would have one drink  that  he’d  barely  touch  to  pay  for  his  seat,  then  he’d  go  back  to  his room, read some more, write letters to his family, then go to sleep. 

Every  few  weeks,  he  saved  some  of  his  allowance  and  took  an inexpensive train ride home and visited his family. At the beginning of each month, Hansu took him for a sushi lunch to remind Noa of his mission in the  world  for  some  higher  purpose  that  neither  could  articulate  fully.  His life felt ideal, and Noa was grateful. 

That morning, as he walked across campus to his George Eliot seminar, he heard someone calling his name. 

“Bando-san, Bando-san,” a woman shouted. It was the radical beauty on campus, Akiko Fumeki. 

Noa stopped and waited. She had never spoken to him before. He was, in

fact,  a  little  afraid  of  her.  She  was  always  saying  contrary  things  to Professor Kuroda, a soft-spoken woman who had grown up and studied in England.  Though  the  professor  was  polite,  Noa  could  tell  that  she  didn’t like  Akiko  much;  the  other  students,  especially  the  females,  could  barely tolerate her. Noa knew it was safer to keep his distance from the students that  the  professors  disliked.  In  the  seminar  room,  Noa  sat  one  seat  away from the professor, while Akiko sat in the very back of the room below the high windows. 

“Ah, Bando-san, how are you?” Akiko asked, flushed and out of breath. 

She spoke to him casually, as if they had talked many times before. 

“Well, thank you. How are you?” 

“So what do you think of Eliot’s final masterpiece?” she asked. 

“It’s excellent. Everything by George Eliot is perfect.” 

“Nonsense.  Adam Bede is a bore. I almost died reading that thing.  Silas Marner is barely tolerable.” 

“Well,  Adam Bede was not as exciting or developed as  Middlemarch, but it remains a wonderful depiction of a brave woman and an honest man—” 

“Oh, please.” Akiko rolled her eyes, and she laughed at him. 

Noa  laughed,  too.  He  knew  she  was  a  Sociology  major,  because everyone had had to introduce himself or herself on the first day of class. 

“You have read everything by George Eliot? That’s impressive,” he said, never having met anyone else who had done so. 

“You’re  the  one  who’s  read  absolutely  everything.  It’s  sickening,  and I’m almost irritated at you for doing so. But I admire it, too. Although, if you like everything you read, I can’t take you that seriously. Perhaps you didn’t  think  about  these  books  long  enough.”  She  said  this  with  a  serious face, not in the least bit concerned about offending him. 

“Soo nee.” Noa smiled. It had not occurred to him that any book that a professor would choose and admire could be inferior even in relation to that author’s  own  works.  Their  professor  had  loved   Adam  Bede  and   Silas Marner. 

“You sit so close to the professor. I think she’s in love with you.” 

In shock, Noa halted. 

“Kuroda-san is sixty years old. Maybe seventy.” Noa moved toward the building door and opened it for her. 

“You think women want to stop having sex just because they’re sixty? 

You’re absurd. She’s probably the most romantic woman in Waseda. She’s read  far  too  many  novels.  You’re  perfect  for  her.  She’d  marry  you tomorrow.  Oh,  the  scandal!  Your  George  Eliot  married  a  young  man,  too, you know. Although her groom did try to kill himself on their honeymoon!” 

Akiko laughed out loud, and the students who were walking up the staircase to  their  classroom  stared  at  her.  Everyone  seemed  puzzled  by  their interaction, since Noa was almost as famous as the campus beauty, but for being aloof. 

Once  in  their  classroom,  she  sat  at  her  old  seat  in  the  back,  and  Noa returned to his seat by the professor. He opened his notebook and retrieved his fountain pen, then looked down at the sheet of white paper lined in pale blue ink. He was thinking about Akiko; she was even prettier up close. 

Kuroda-san sat down to give her lecture. She wore a pea-green sweater over  her  Peter  Pan–collar  white  blouse  and  a  brown  tweed  skirt.  Her  tiny feet  were  shod  with  a  childish  pair  of  Mary  Janes.  She  was  so  small  and thin that she gave the impression that she could almost fly away like a sheet of paper or a dry leaf. 

Kuroda-san’s  lecture  was  primarily  an  extensive  psychological  portrait of  the  heroine  in   Daniel  Deronda,  the  self-centered  Gwendolen  Harleth, who  changes  as  a  result  of  her  suffering  and  the  goodness  of  Daniel.  The professor  put  great  emphasis  on  a  woman’s  lot  being  determined  by  her economic  position  and  marriage  prospects.  Unsurprisingly,  the  professor compared  Gwendolen  to  the  vain  and  greedy  Rosamond  Vincy  of Middlemarch,  but  argued  that  in  contrast,  Gwendolen  achieves  the Aristotelian  anagnorisis  and  peripeteia.  Kuroda-san  spent  most  of  the lecture on Gwendolen, then right before the period ended, she spoke a little about  Mirah  and  Daniel,  the  Jews  of  the  book.  Kuroda-san  gave  some background on Zionism and the role of Jews in Victorian novels. 

“Jewish men are often seen as exceptionally brilliant, and the women are often beautiful and tragic. Here we have a situation where a man does not know  his  own  identity  as  an  outsider.  He  is  like  Moses,  the  infant  in Genesis who learns that he is Jewish and not Egyptian—” As Kuroda-san was saying this, she glanced at Noa, but he was not aware of it, because he was taking notes. 

“However, when Daniel learns that he is indeed a Jew, Daniel is free to love the virtuous Mirah, another talented singer like his Jewish mother, and

they will go east to Israel.” Kuroda-san sighed quietly, as if she was pleased by Eliot’s ending. 

“So are you saying that it is better for people to only love within their race,  that  people  like  the  Jews  need  to  live  apart  in  their  own  country?” 

Akiko asked, without raising her hand. She did not seem to believe in that formality. 

“Well, I think George Eliot is arguing that there is great nobility in being Jewish and wanting to be part of a Jewish state. Eliot recognizes that these people  were  often  persecuted  unfairly.  They  have  every  right  to  a  Jewish state. The war has taught us that bad things happened to them, and that can’t happen  again.  The  Jews  have  done  no  wrong,  but  the  Europeans—” 

Kuroda-san  spoke  more  quietly  than  usual,  as  if  she  was  afraid  that someone  might  overhear  her  and  she  would  get  in  trouble.  “It’s complicated, but Eliot was far ahead of her contemporaries to think about the issue of discrimination based on religion.  Nee?” 

There  were  nine  students  in  the  class,  and  everyone  nodded,  including Noa, but Akiko looked irritated nonetheless. 

“Japan was an ally of Germany,” Akiko said. 

“That is not part of this discussion, Akiko-san.” 

The professor opened her book nervously, wanting to change the subject. 

“Eliot is wrong,” Akiko said, undeterred. “Maybe the Jews have a right to have their own state, but I see no need for Mirah and Daniel to have to leave  England.  I  think  this  nobility  argument  or  a  greater  nation  for  a persecuted people is a pretext to eject all the unwanted foreigners.” 

Noa did not look up. He found himself writing down everything Akiko said, because it upset him to think that this could be true. He had admired Daniel’s courage and goodness throughout the book, and he had not thought much  about  Eliot’s  political  design.  Was  it  possible  that  Eliot  was suggesting that foreigners, no matter how much she admired them, should leave England? At this point in the course, everyone in the room despised Akiko, but suddenly he admired her courage to think so differently and to suggest such a difficult truth. He felt lucky to be at a university and not in most  other  settings,  where  the  person  in  charge  was  always  right. 

Nevertheless, until he really listened to Akiko disagree with the professor, he  had  not  thought  for  himself  fully,  and  it  had  never  occurred  to  him  to disagree in public. 

After class, he walked home alone, deep in thoughts of her, and he knew that he wanted to be with her, even if it would not be easy. The following Tuesday,  before  the  seminar  began,  Noa  went  early  to  class  to  claim  the chair next to hers. The professor tried not to show that she was hurt by this defection, but of course, she was. 

16

Osaka, April 1960

At some point in the past four years, Mozasu had worked as a foreman at all  six  of  Goro’s  pachinko  parlors.  Goro  had  opened  new  parlors  in  rapid succession, and Mozasu had helped him to start each new one. Mozasu was twenty years old, and he did little else but mind the shops and fix whatever needed  fixing  while  Goro  scouted  for  new  locations  and  came  up  with inspired ideas for his growing empire, which oddly seemed to work out. In business, Goro could not miss, it seemed, and he credited some of his good fortune to Mozasu’s willingness to labor without ceasing. 

It  was  April  and  early  in  the  morning  when  Mozasu  arrived  at  the manager’s office at Paradaisu Six—the newest pachinko parlor. 

“Ohayo. The car is waiting. I’m taking you to Totoyama-san’s for new clothes. Let’s go,” Goro said. 

“Maji?  Why?  I  have  enough  suits  for  this  year  and  next.  I’m  the  best-dressed foreman in Osaka,” Mozasu said, laughing. Unlike his brother, Noa, Mozasu had never cared for nice clothing. He wore the well-tailored clothes Goro wanted him to wear only because his boss was fastidious about how his  staff  should  look.  Goro’s  employees  were  an  extension  of  himself,  he believed, and Goro was strict about their personal hygiene as well. 

Mozasu  had  too  much  to  do,  and  he  didn’t  feel  like  going  down  to Totoyama-san’s place. He was eager to phone the newspapers to put out ads for more workers. Paradaisu Six needed men to work the floor on the late

shift,  and  since  the  interiors  of  Paradaisu  Seven  would  be  finished  in  a month, he had to start thinking about hiring for Seven as well. 

“You have the right clothes for a foreman, but you’ll need new suits to be the manager of Seven.” 

“Ehh?  I  can’t  be  manager  of  Seven!”  Mozasu  replied,  startled.  “That’s Okada-san’s job.” 

“He’s gone.” 

“What? Why? He was looking forward to being manager.” 

“Stealing.” 

“What? I don’t believe it.” 

“Honto desu,” Goro said, nodding. “I caught him. I had suspected it, and it was confirmed.” 

“That’s terrible.” Mozasu couldn’t fathom anyone stealing from Goro. It would be like stealing from your father. “Why did he do that?” 

“Gambling. He owed some goons money. He said he was going to pay me back, but the losses got bigger. You know. Anyway, his mistress came by  this  morning  to  apologize  for  him.  She’s  pregnant.  He  finally  gets  her pregnant and then he loses his job. Moron.” 

“Oh, shit.” Mozasu recalled all the times Okada had spoken of wanting a son. Even a daughter would do, he’d said. Okada was crazy about kids and pachinko. Even with all his experience, no pachinko parlor in Osaka would hire him if Goro had gotten rid of him for stealing. No one stole from Goro. 

“Did he say he was sorry?” 

“Of  course.  Cried  like  a  child.  I  told  him  to  get  out  of  Osaka.  I  don’t want to see his face anymore.” 

“Soo nee,”  Mozasu  said,  feeling  bad  for  Okada,  who  had  always  been nice to him. He had a Korean mother and a Japanese father, but he always said he felt like a full Korean because he was such a passionate man. “Is his wife okay?” Mozasu knew Goro got along with both women. 

“Yeah.  His  wife  and  mistress  are  fine,”  Goro  replied.  “But  I  told  the mistress that he shouldn’t show up around here. I wouldn’t be so nice next time.” 

Mozasu nodded. 

“Let’s go to Totoyama-san’s. I’m tired of feeling sad. Seeing Totoyama’s girls will cheer me up,” Goro said. 

Mozasu followed his boss to the car. He knew enough not to ask about

his new salary; Goro didn’t like to talk about money, strangely enough. The manager’s salary would be better than that of a foreman. Mozasu had been saving  carefully  for  his  mother’s  confection  shop,  and  they  were  pretty close  to  having  enough  to  buy  a  small  store  near  the  train  station.  With Uncle  Yoseb’s  health  worsening,  Aunt  Kyunghee  couldn’t  make  candy  to sell when she was home. With only his mother and grandmother working in the  stall  and  with  Noa  in  his  third  year  at  Waseda  in  Tokyo,  any  extra money  would  be  good  for  the  family,  he  figured.  Each  Saturday  evening, Mozasu felt proud handing his mother his fat pay envelope; she’d tried to increase his allowance, but he had refused except for his bus fare. He didn’t need  much,  since  he  ate  his  meals  at  the  employee  cafeteria  and  Goro bought him his work clothes. Mozasu worked seven days a week and slept at  home;  if  it  was  very  late,  he  slept  in  one  of  the  spare  employee  dorm rooms at the parlors. 

The shop door shut behind them after they exited. 

“Boss, I don’t know. Do you think the guys will listen to me? Like the way  they  do  Okada?”  Mozasu  asked.  It  wasn’t  that  Mozasu  wasn’t ambitious; it was that he enjoyed being the morning or evening foreman at the  shops;  he  was  very  good  at  it.  Being  a  manager  was  more  serious; everyone looked up to the manager. He would be in charge whenever Goro wasn’t there. Okada was almost thirty-five and tall like a baseball player. 

“I’m  flattered  and  grateful,  but  you  know,  I  think  some  of  the  other managers might—” 

“Shut  up,  kid.  I  know  what  I’m  doing.  You’re  smarter  than  the  other managers,  and  you  know  how  to  solve  problems  by  yourself.  This  is  the most important shop. If I’m running around checking the others, I need you to be sharp.” 

“But Seven is going to need almost fifty employees. How am I supposed to find fifty men?” 

“Actually, you’re going to need at least sixty men and twenty pretty girls for the prize counters.” 

“Really?” Mozasu was always game for Goro’s outlandish plans, but this seemed a bit much, even for him. “How will I find—” 

“You will. You always do. And you can hire any kind of girl you want for the prize counters—Okinawans,  burakumin, Koreans, Japanese, I don’t care. They just have to be cute and pretty, but not so slutty they’ll scare the

men. The girls are always important. Ha.” 

“I didn’t realize that the dorm could accommodate so many—” 

“You worry a lot. That’s why you’ll be perfect.” Goro smiled widely. 

Mozasu thought about that and had to agree. No one worried about the shops nearly as much as he did. 

In the car ride to Totoyama’s workshop, the driver and Goro talked about wrestling, while Mozasu sat quietly. In his mind, he was making lists of all the things that had to be done for Seven. As he pondered over which of the men he would shuffle around from the other shops, he realized that maybe he  was  ready  after  all  to  become  a  manager  of  a  shop,  and  it  made  him smile a little. Goro was never wrong; maybe he wasn’t wrong about him, either. Mozasu wasn’t smart like his brother, who was now studying English literature at Waseda in Tokyo and who could read thick novels in English without a dictionary. Noa wanted to work for a real Japanese company; he wouldn’t have wanted to work in a pachinko parlor. Noa thought that after the family bought the confectionery, Mozasu should work with the family. 

Like most Japanese, Noa thought pachinko parlors were not respectable. 

The car stopped in front of a squat redbrick building that had been used as a textile factory before the war. A large persimmon tree shaded the gray metal door. As Goro’s exclusive uniform maker, Totoyama had earned and saved  enough  to  move  her  shop  here  from  her  home-cum-workshop  near Ikaino.  She  and  her  sons,  Haruki  and  Daisuke,  now  lived  in  three  of  the back  rooms,  and  she  used  the  rest  of  the  building  as  the  workroom.  She employed half a dozen assistants who worked six days a week filling orders for  uniforms.  By  word  of  mouth,  she  had  picked  up  work  from  other Korean  business  owners  in  Osaka  and  now  made  uniforms  for   yakiniku restaurants  and  other  pachinko  parlors  in  the  Kansai  region,  but  Goro’s work always came first, because it was he who had told the others to hire her. 

When Goro rang the bell, Totoyama answered the door herself. A hired girl, another apprentice, brought them hot fragrant tea and imported wheat biscuits  on  a  lacquered  tray.  Totoyama  led  Mozasu  to  the  mirror  so  she could  take  his  measurements.  With  pins  in  her  mouth,  she  measured  the

width of his long arms. 

“You are getting thinner, Mozasu-san,” Totoyama said. 

“Soo nee,” he answered. “Goro-san tells me I need to eat more.” 

Goro nodded as he munched on the biscuits and drank a second cup of genmaicha.  He  was  seated  on  a  cedar  bench  covered  with  indigo  fabric–

covered  cushions.  He  felt  peaceful,  watching  Totoyama  work.  He  always felt better when he solved problems. Okada had turned out to be a crook, so he got rid of him. Now he was going to promote Mozasu. 

The  large  and  airy  workroom  had  been  whitewashed  recently,  but  the wood floors were shabby and old. The floors were cleaned each day, but the morning’s bits of fabric and thread littered the areas around the worktables. 

In the slant of light from the skylight, a pale column of dust motes pierced the room. The long workroom was lined with six sewing machines, and a girl sat behind each one. They tried not to look at the men, but couldn’t help being drawn to the young one who came by the shop at least once a year. 

Mozasu  had  grown  noticeably  more  attractive.  He  had  his  father’s purposeful gaze and welcoming smile. He liked to laugh, and this was one of the reasons why Goro liked the boy so much. Mozasu was enthusiastic, not prone to moodiness. He was wearing a foreman’s uniform that had been made in this workshop, and the girls who had worked on his clothing felt connected  to  him  in  this  way  but  could  hardly  admit  this.  They  knew  he didn’t have a girlfriend. 

“There’s a new face here,” Goro said, folding his arms over his chest. He scanned the girls carefully and smiled. He got up from his seat and walked toward them. He bowed deeply, and this was funny because he was such an important person. The girls rose up simultaneously and bowed. Goro shook his head and made a silly face, scrunching up his nose to make them laugh. 

“Sit, sit,” he said. 

He had a kind of comic facility combined with a physical smoothness. 

To make women laugh, he could walk while wiggling his shoulders. He was a stout little man with funny movements who liked flirting with all kinds of women.  You  remembered  him.  You  wanted  him  to  like  you.  Because  he could be silly, it was possible to forget that he was a powerful businessman and wealthy enough to own seven pachinko parlors. With a word, he could make grown men leave Osaka for good. 

“Eriko-san, Reiko-san, Midori-san, Hanako-san, and Motoko-san,  nee?” 

Goro recited their names perfectly, then stopped in front of the new girl. 

“Goro   desu,”  he  said,  presenting  himself  to  the  new  girl.  “You  have lovely hands.” 

“Yumi   desu,”  the  young  woman  replied,  slightly  annoyed  at  him  for distracting her from her sewing. 

Totoyama  looked  up  from  her  measurements  and  frowned  at  the  new girl.  Yumi’s  sewing  was  neater  than  the  others’,  but  she  was  often  too purposely aloof, taking lunch alone or reading during her breaks rather than talking. Her skills and personal nature were secondary to the fact that she had to respect Goro-san, to humor him even. To Totoyama, Goro-san was a great man who was truly good. Though he joked with girls, he was never inappropriate. Goro had never asked any of the girls out or done any of the bad  things  her  other  male  customers  had  tried  to  do.  Yumi  had  been working for her for two months. From her papers, Totoyama knew she was Korean,  but  Yumi  went  by  her  pass  name  and  never  brought  up  her background. Totoyama didn’t care about a person’s background as long as the employee did her job. Yumi was an elegant girl with good skin and a high bosom. She did not have a good figure for a kimono but had the sort of curves that men liked. It was natural that Goro-san would have noticed her. 

“Goro-san,  so  Mozasu-san  is  the  new  manager  of  Seven?”  Totoyama asked. “How wonderful for such a young man.” 

Mozasu looked down, avoiding the looks of curiosity and wonder in the eyes of the seamstresses, except for Yumi, who continued her sewing. 

“Yes. Mozasu-san will need three dark suits. Use a good fabric, please. 

He  will  need  some  nice  neckties.  Something  different  from  the  others. 

Something elegant, older looking.” 

Mozasu  stood  in  front  of  the  three-way  mirror  and  noticed  Yumi,  who was working diligently. She was lovely. Her shoulders were thin and wide and her neck long, reminding him of an illustration of a swan on a box of detergent. 

When  Totoyama  finished  taking  Mozasu’s  measurements,  the  men returned to the car. 

“Yumi-san, the new girl, is very pretty. A terrific ass,” Goro said. 

Mozasu nodded. 

Goro laughed. “Finally, some interest from the hardworking boy! She’d be a good one for you.” 

  

The following week, when he returned alone for another fitting, Totoyama was finishing up with a customer and asked Yumi to get him his suit. 

Yumi handed him the partially finished suit and pointed to the dressing room behind the indigo fabric curtain. 

“Thank you,” he said in Japanese. 

She said nothing at all, but stood there coolly, waiting to be discharged from her duties by Totoyama. 

When  Mozasu  came  out,  Yumi  was  standing  in  front  of  the  mirror holding  a  scarlet  wool  pincushion.  Totoyama  was  still  occupied  with another customer on the other side of the room. 

Yumi looked at his neckline and cocked her head. The lapel needed some work, she noticed. 

“I’m Mozasu Boku. It’s a pleasure to meet you.” 

Yumi frowned at the lapel and pulled out a pin from the cushion to mark the place. 

“You’re not going to poke me, are you?” he said, laughing. 

Yumi walked behind him to check the yoke. 

“You’re not going to speak to me? Really?” 

“I’m not here to speak with you. I’m here to check your fit.” 

“If I buy you dinner, maybe you can find a few words for me,” Mozasu said,  repeating  a  line  he’d  heard  Goro  use  on  women.  Mozasu  had  never asked a girl out. He was a manager now at Paradaisu Seven. A girl might find that impressive, he thought. 

“No dinner. No thank you.” 

“You have to eat.” This was another one of Goro’s stock phrases. “You finish  work  around  seven  thirty.  I  know  because  I’ve  been  here  before  to pick up uniforms.” 

“I go to school after work. I don’t have time for nonsense.” 

“I’m nonsense?” 

“Yes.” 

Mozasu smiled at her. She didn’t talk like anyone he knew. 

“What are you studying anyway?” 

“English.” 

“I know English. I can help you.” 

“You don’t know English.” 

“Hello, Miss Yumi. My name is Moses Park. How are you?” He repeated the  lines  he’d  practiced  with  Noa  from  his  English  books.  “What  kind  of weather are you having in Tulsa, Oklahoma?” he asked. “Is it rainy or dry? 

I  like  hamburgers.  Do  you  like  hamburgers?  I  work  at  a  place  called Paradise.” 

“Where  did  you  learn  that?  You  didn’t  even  finish  high  school,”  Yumi said. 

“How do you know that?” He smiled. 

“Never mind,” she said, seeing Totoyama approaching them. 

“Miss Yumi, do you like the fascinating novels of Mr. Charles Dickens? 

He is my brother’s favorite author. I think his books are very long. There are no pictures in his books.” 

Yumi smiled a little, then bowed to her boss before pointing out the areas that  needed  work.  She  bowed  again  before  leaving  them  to  return  to  her sewing machine. 

“I’m so sorry to keep you waiting, Mozasu-san. How are you? How is Goro-san?” 

Mozasu answered her politely, and when she was nearly done with the pins,  he  turned  and  sneezed  dramatically,  curving  his  back  as  if  to  bend forward and ripping the carefully basted seams. 

“Oh, I’m a fool. I’m so sorry,” he said, glancing at Yumi, who was trying not to laugh. “Should I come back tomorrow or the next day? I may be able to come by before you close.” 

“Oh, yes, please,” Totoyama said, assessing the torn seams, oblivious to the two young people studying each other. “We’ll have it ready for you by tomorrow night.” 

17

October 1961

Mozasu  leaned  against  the  maple  tree  opposite  Totoyama-san’s workshop,  his  profile  only  slightly  obscured  by  its  trunk.  This  was  their arranged meeting place. Three nights a week, Mozasu met Yumi after work. 

For  over  a  year,  he’d  been  accompanying  her  to  the  English  class  at  the church, then heading back to her rented room where she’d fix them a simple dinner. Often, they would make love before Mozasu returned to Paradaisu Seven, where he worked until closing before falling asleep in his quarters at the employee dormitory. 

It was already October, and though the early evening breezes had yet to lose the supple warmth of summer, the leaves on the trees were beginning to turn gold and shiny. The tall tree above him formed a burnished metallic lace  against  the  blurry  evening  sky.  Laborers  and  other  men  in  uniform were  returning  home  from  work,  and  small  children  popped  out  of  their homes to greet their fathers. In the past year, the road where Totoyama had her new workshop had improved, with families moving into the abandoned houses near the river. A local vegetable seller had done so well in his once-desolate spot that he was now able to rent the adjacent lot for his brother-in-law  to  sell  dry  goods.  The  new  bakery  selling  Portuguese-style  sponge cakes, which perfumed the street invitingly, had achieved sufficient fame in Osaka to command long lines each morning. 

The  seamstresses  at  Totoyama-san’s  were  working  later  than  usual,  so

Mozasu studied his crumpled list of homework words. He’d never thought much of his memory when he was at school, but he found that he was able to remember English words and phrases very well. His recall was useful for impressing Yumi. Unlike most girls, who cared about gifts of cash, dresses, or  trinkets,  Mozasu’s  girlfriend  cared  only  about  learning.  Yumi  seemed happiest with him when he gave the right answers when their teacher, the Reverend  John  Maryman,  called  on  him.  Yumi,  who  wanted  to  live  in America, believed that she had to learn English well if she was to live there one day. 

There  was  only  a  little  natural  light  left  to  read  by,  but  when  a  man’s shadow  passed  over  him,  he  couldn’t  make  out  the  words  on  the  page. 

Noticing  the  solemn  pair  of  men’s  work  shoes  a  few  paces  from  him, Mozasu glanced up. 

“Is it possible that you are studying, Mo-san?  Honto?” 

“Hey, Haruki!” Mozasu shouted. “Is that you? I haven’t seen you since I don’t know when!” He clasped his friend’s hand heartily and shook it. “I’m always  asking  your  mother  about  you.  She’s  real  proud  of  you.  Not  like she’s bragging, but you know, in her quiet, polite Totoyama-san way. And look  at  you!  Haruki,  the—police  officer!”  Mozasu  whistled  at  Haruki’s academy  uniform.  “You  look  really  serious.  Makes  me  want  to  commit  a crime. You’re not going to tell on me, right?” 

Haruki  smiled  and  hit  Mozasu  on  the  shoulder  lightly  with  his  fist, feeling shy around his old school friend. It had been difficult to keep away from Mozasu, but Haruki had done so because his feelings for him had been too strong. There had been other infatuations over the years and encounters with strangers. Recently, there was a fellow at the academy, Koji, another tough and funny guy. As he had done with Mozasu, Haruki did his best to keep  away  from  Koji,  because  he  knew  well  enough  to  draw  a  thick  line between what was public and what was private. 

“What  the  hell  are  you  doing  around  here?  Don’t  you  live  near  the academy?” 

Haruki nodded. “I have the week off.” 

“So? When do you become a cop? I mean detective.” Mozasu chuckled, pretending to bow formally. 

“Two years.” 

Upon seeing Mozasu by the maple tree, Haruki had been afraid to cross

the  street.  The  mere  image  of  him  had  been  overwhelming.  As  a  boy, Haruki  had  worshipped  Mozasu,  who  had  saved  him  from  the  anguish  of school.  When  Mozasu  had  dropped  out  to  work  for  Goro-san  and  then disappeared into his job, Haruki had felt the loss like a deadly punch to the chest. After Mozasu left to work at the pachinko parlors, the sheep, witches, and  ghouls  of  their  high  school  emerged  to  the  fore,  forcing  Haruki  to retreat to any available sanctuary. During his free periods, he had filled his burgeoning sketchbooks with pencil drawings in the safety of a kindhearted art  teacher’s  classroom.  Home  was  always  the  same:  His  younger  brother would  never  grow  up,  and  his  mother  could  never  quit  working  until  her eyes  failed.  His  art  teacher,  whose  husband  and  brothers  were  police detectives,  had  given  Haruki  the  suggestion  to  go  to  the  police  academy. 

Interestingly,  the  teacher  had  not  been  wrong.  Haruki  loved  the  academy with its rules and hierarchy. He did what he was told to do, and he did it very well. Also, it was easier just to start again in a new place where no one knew you. 

“Why are you standing out here?” Haruki asked. The sun was very low, and its orange-red color moved him. 

“I’m waiting for Yumi. She works for your mother. No one’s supposed to know  about  us,  though.  Of  course,  I  don’t  think  your  mother  would  care. 

I’m not such a terrible guy.” 

“I won’t say anything,” Haruki said, thinking that Mozasu had become more appealing. He had always admired Mozasu’s smooth brow, the strong nose, and neat white teeth, but in his manager suit he looked like a grown man in charge of his life. Haruki wanted to follow him. 

The workshop windows were still brightly lit, and the girls labored with their dark heads bowed at their worktables. Mozasu could imagine Yumi’s thin fingers flying across the fabric. When she focused on her work, Yumi could not be distracted. She was like that about everything and could be left alone  working  for  hours.  Mozasu  couldn’t  imagine  being  so  quiet  all  the time;  he  would  miss  the  bustle  of  the  pachinko  parlor.  He  loved  all  the moving pieces of his large, noisy business. His Presbyterian minister father had believed in a divine design, and Mozasu believed that life was like this game where the player could adjust the dials yet also expect the uncertainty of factors he couldn’t control. He understood why his customers wanted to play something that looked fixed but which also left room for randomness

and hope. 

“Do you see her?” Mozasu pointed with pride. “There! She’s the fourth desk from the—” 

“Yumi-san. Yes, I’ve met her. She’s a good seamstress. A very elegant person.  You’re  lucky,”  Haruki  said.  “And  how’s  your  work?  Have  you made your fortune?” 

“You should come by. I’m at the Paradaisu Seven now. Come tomorrow. 

I’m there all day and night nearly, except for when I meet Yumi and take her to the English class.” 

“I don’t know. I have to see my brother while I’m home.” 

“I hear he’s been a little down.” 

“That’s why I came home. Mother said he’s getting a little strange. Not giving her trouble or anything, but she says that he talks less and less. The doctors don’t know what to do. They want him to go live in an institution. 

They  say  he  might  be  happier  living  with  other  people  like  himself,  but  I doubt  that.  Those  places  can  be—”  Haruki  sucked  wind  between  his clenched teeth. “Of course, Mother would never allow it. Daisuke is a very good child.” Haruki said this quietly, having known for as long as he could remember that Daisuke would be his responsibility after his mother could no longer care for him. Who Haruki married would be determined by her willingness to be good to Daisuke and his aging mother. 

“Yumi says that it might be good for him in America. Then again, she thinks everyone is better off in America. She said it’s not like it is here in Japan, where a person can’t be different.” 

Mozasu  thought  his  girlfriend  was  irrationally  biased  in  favor  of America and anything from America. Like his brother, Noa, Yumi thought English  was  the  most  important  language  and  America  was  the  best country. 

“Yumi said there are better doctors in America.” Mozasu shrugged. 

“That’s probably true.” 

Haruki smiled, having often wished that he could live somewhere else, where he didn’t know anyone. 

As Yumi walked toward the meeting spot, she recognized her employer’s older  son.  It  would  have  been  awkward  to  turn  around  so  she  stayed  her course. 

“You  know  Haruki-san,”  Mozasu  said  to  Yumi,  smiling.  “He  was  my

only friend in high school. And now he will be fighting crime!” 

Yumi nodded, smiling uncomfortably. 

“Yumi-san. It’s good to see you again. I’m grateful to you that I got to see my friend again after so many, many years.” 

“You are home from the academy, Haruki-san?” Yumi kept her posture both formal and demure. 

Haruki  nodded,  then  made  excuses  about  Daisuke  waiting  for  him  at home. Before leaving them, however, Haruki promised to visit Mozasu at the pachinko parlor the following morning. 

Their English class met in the large conference room in the offices of the new Korean church, built recently with large donations from some wealthy yakiniku families. Despite his European name, the teacher, John Maryman, was a Korean who had been adopted as an infant by American missionaries. 

English was his first language. As a result of his superior diet, rich in both protein  and  calcium,  John  was  significantly  taller  than  the  Koreans  and Japanese. At nearly six feet, he caused a commotion wherever he went, as if a giant had descended from heaven. Though he spoke Japanese and Korean proficiently, he spoke both languages with an American accent. In addition to  his  size,  his  mannerisms  were  distinctly  foreign.  John  liked  to  tease people he didn’t know well, and if something was funny, he laughed louder than  most.  If  it  hadn’t  been  for  his  patient  Korean  wife,  who  possessed masterful  noonchi and was able to explain to others tactfully that John just didn’t know any better, he would have gotten into trouble far more often for his many cultural missteps. For a Presbyterian pastor, John seemed far too jovial.  He  was  a  good  man  whose  faith  and  intelligence  were irreproachable.  His  mother,  Cynthia  Maryman,  an  automobile  tire  heiress, had  sent  him  to  Princeton  and  Yale  Divinity  School,  and  to  his  parents’

delight,  he  had  returned  to  Asia  to  spread  the  gospel.  His  lovely  coloring was  more  olive  than  golden  and  his  fringed,  ink-black  eyes,  constantly bemused, invited women to linger in his presence. 

A girl normally hard to win over, Yumi admired her teacher, whom all the  students  called  Pastor  John.  To  her,  John  represented  a  Korean  being from  a  better  world  where  Koreans  weren’t  whores,  drunks,  or  thieves. 

Yumi’s mother, a prostitute and alcoholic, had slept with men for money or drinks,  and  her  father,  a  pimp  and  a  violent  drunk,  had  been  imprisoned often for his criminality. Yumi felt that her three elder half sisters were as sexually indiscriminate and common as barn animals. Her younger brother had  died  as  a  child,  and  soon  after,  at  fourteen  years  old,  Yumi  ran  away from home with her younger sister and somehow supported them with small jobs in textile factories until the younger sister died. Over the years, Yumi had  become  an  excellent  seamstress.  She  refused  to  acknowledge  her family,  who  lived  in  the  worst  sections  of  Osaka.  If  she  spotted  a  woman who  had  even  a  passing  resemblance  to  her  mother  on  any  street,  Yumi would cross to the other side or turn around to walk away. From watching American movies, she had decided that one day she would live in California and  planned  on  becoming  a  seamstress  in  Hollywood.  She  knew  Koreans who had returned to North Korea and many more who had gone back to the South, yet she could not muster any affection for either nation. To her, being Korean  was  just  another  horrible  encumbrance,  much  like  being  poor  or having a shameful family you could not cast off. Why would she ever live there?  But  she  could  not  imagine  clinging  to  Japan,  which  was  like  a beloved  stepmother  who  refused  to  love  you,  so  Yumi  dreamed  of  Los Angeles. Until Mozasu, with his swagger and enormous dreams, Yumi had never let a man into her bed, and now that she had attached herself to him, she wanted both of them to go to America to make another life where they wouldn’t be despised or ignored. She could not imagine raising a child here. 

The English class had fifteen pupils who attended three nights a week. 

Until  Mozasu  showed  up,  Yumi  had  been  Pastor  John’s  best  student. 

Mozasu  had  an  enormous  advantage  over  her  since  he  had  been unintentionally  studying  with  his  brother,  Noa,  for  years  by  being  his  at-home English quiz partner, but Yumi did not mind. She was relieved that he was better than she was at this, that he made more money than she did, and that he was relentlessly kind to her. 

Each  class  began  with  Pastor  John  going  around  the  room  asking  each person a series of questions. 

“Moses,”  Pastor  John  said  in  his  teaching  voice,  “how  is  the  pachinko parlor? Did you make a lot of money today?” 

Mozasu  laughed.  “Yes,  Pastor  John.  Today,  I  earned  lot  money. 

Tomorrow, I make more! Do you need money?” 

“No, thank you, Moses. But please remember to help the poor, Moses. 

There are many among us.” 

“The pachinko money isn’t mine, Pastor John. My boss is rich, but I am not a rich man yet. One day, I will rich.” 

“You will  be rich.” 

“Yes, I will  be rich man, Pastor John. A man must have money.” 

John smiled at Moses kindly, wanting to disabuse him of such idolatrous notions, but he turned to Yumi. 

“Yumi, how many uniforms did you make today?” 

Yumi smiled and color rushed to her face. 

“Today, I made two vests, Pastor John.” 

John moved on to the others, encouraging the reserved students to talk to each other as well as to the class. He wanted the Koreans to speak well; he wanted  no  one  ever  to  look  down  on  them.  He  had  left  his  beautifully comfortable  life  in  Princeton,  New  Jersey,  because  he  felt  sorry  for  the impoverished Koreans in Japan. In his wonderful childhood, filled with the warmth of his loving parents, he had always felt bad for the Koreans who had lost their nation for good. People like Moses and Yumi had never been to Korea. There was always talk of Koreans going back home, but in a way, all  of  them  had  lost  the  home  in  their  minds  for  good.  His  parents  had adopted him alone, and he had no known siblings. Because John had always felt so happy with his parents, he’d felt guilty that many others hadn’t been chosen  the  way  he  was.  Why  was  that?  He  wanted  to  know.  There  were unhappy adoptions, to be sure, but John knew his lot was better than almost anyone’s. “Chosen” was always the word his mother had used with him. 

“We chose you, our darling John. You had the loveliest smile, even as a small  baby.  The  ladies  at  the  orphanage  loved  holding  you,  because  you were such an affectionate child.” 

Teaching  English  class  wasn’t  part  of  his  job  as  a  pastor.  He  didn’t proselytize  his  students,  most  of  whom  were  not  parishioners.  John  loved the sound of English words, the sounds of Americans talking. He wanted to give  this  to  the  poor  Koreans  in  Osaka.  He  wanted  them  to  have  another language that wasn’t Japanese. 

Like  his  students,  John  was  born  in  Japan  to  Korean  parents.  His biological parents had left him with their landlord. John didn’t know how old  he  was  exactly.  His  parents  had  given  him  the  birthday  of  Martin

Luther,  November  10.  The  only  fact  he  knew  about  his  birth  parents  was that  they  had  left  their  rented  room  in  the  early  hours  of  the  morning without paying the rent and had left him behind. His adoptive mother said this  must  have  been  because  the  landlord  had  money  and  shelter,  and wherever his biological parents were going, they may not have been able to give these things to him. Their sacrifice of leaving him was an act of love, his mother had said every time John had asked about them. Nevertheless, whenever John saw an older Korean woman or man who could be the age of his parents, he wondered. He could not help it. He wished he could give them money now, for John was a very wealthy man, and he wished he could meet his biological parents and give them a house to keep them warm and food to eat when they were hungry. 

As Pastor John teased the two sisters in the back about their fondness for sweets, Mozasu knocked his knee gently against Yumi’s. Mozasu had long thighs,  and  he  had  to  move  his  thigh  only  a  little  to  graze  the  skirt  fabric covering  Yumi’s  pretty  legs.  She  tapped  him  back  in  slight  annoyance, though she did not mind. 

Pastor  John  had  asked  the  younger  sister  about  what  she  did  when  it rained, and instead of listening to the girl stumble in English, casting about for the word “umbrella,” Mozasu found himself staring at Yumi. He loved to  look  at  her  soft  profile,  the  way  her  dark,  sad  eyes  met  her  high cheekbones. 

“Moses,  how  can  you  learn  English  if  you  are  just  staring  at  Yumi?” 

John asked, laughing. 

Yumi blushed again. “Behave,” she whispered to Mozasu in Japanese. 

“I  cannot  stop,  Pastor  John.  I  love  her,”  Mozasu  declared,  and  John clapped in delight. 

Yumi looked down at her notes. 

“Will you two marry?” Pastor John asked. 

Yumi appeared stunned at this question, though she shouldn’t have been. 

Pastor John was liable to say anything. 

“She will marry me,” Mozasu said. “I am confident.” 

“What?” Yumi cried. 

The women in the back were near tears laughing. Two men in the middle of the class pounded on their desks, cheering loudly. 

“This is fun,” John said. “I think we are witnessing a proposal. ‘Pro-po-

sal’ means an invitation to marry.” 

“Of course, you will marry me, Yumi-chan. You love me, and I love you very  much.  We  will  marry.  You  see,”  Mozasu  said  calmly  in  English,  “I have plan.” 

Yumi  rolled  her  eyes.  He  knew  she  wanted  to  go  to  America,  but  he wanted to stay in Osaka and open his own pachinko parlor in a few years. 

He intended to buy his mother, aunt, uncle, and grandmother a huge house when he was rich. He said that if they wanted to move back to Korea, he would make so much money that he would build them castles. He couldn’t make this kind of money in Los Angeles, he’d explained. He couldn’t leave his family, and Yumi knew this. 

“You and I love each other.  Soo nee, Yumi-chan?” Mozasu smiled at her and took her hand. 

The  pupils  clapped  loudly  and  stamped  their  feet  as  if  watching  a baseball game. 

Yumi bent her head down, mortified by his behavior, but she couldn’t be angry at him. She could never be angry with him. He was the only friend she’d ever had. 

“We’ll have to plan a wedding then,” John said. 

18

Tokyo, March 1962

Is he married?” Akiko asked. Her eyes brightened with anticipation. 

“Yes.  He’s  married,  and  his  wife  is  expecting  in  a  few  months,”  Noa answered, almost flattening his voice. 

“I want to know more about your family. C’mon,” she pleaded. 

Noa got up to get dressed. 

She  couldn’t  help  it.  Akiko  was  training  to  be  a  sociologist.  She collected pieces of data, and her lover was her favorite puzzle. Yet the more she inquired, the more reticent he grew. When he answered her in his pithy manner, she had a habit of saying, “Sooo?” as if the facts of his life were something  marvelous  to  behold.  Everything  about  him  was  fascinating  to her, but Noa didn’t want to be fascinating. He wanted just to be with her. He didn’t  mind  when  she  turned  her  headlights  on  strangers;  it  was  far  more interesting to hear her attempts at demystifying others. 

He  was  Akiko’s  first  Korean  lover.  In  bed,  she  wanted  him  to  speak Korean. 

“How do you say ‘pretty’?” she’d asked just a few hours before. 

“Yeh-puh-dah.” Such a simple word felt strange in his mouth when he’d said it to her. Akiko was stunning; “pretty” wouldn’t suffice in describing her  beauty.  “Ah-reum-dop-da,”  he  should  have  said,  but  Noa  didn’t.  She was an excellent social scientist not to have asked for the Korean word for love,  because  he  would  have  no  doubt  revealed  his  hesitation  in  the

translation. 

Not wishing to be a specimen under her glass, Noa didn’t talk about his mother, who had peddled kimchi and, later, confections so he could go to school,  or  his  father,  who’d  died  from  harsh  imprisonment  during  the colonial era. These aspects of his biography had happened a long time ago as far as he was concerned. He wasn’t ashamed of his past; it wasn’t that. 

He  resented  her  curiosity.  Akiko  was  a  Japanese  girl  from  an  upper-class family  who  had  grown  up  in  Minami-Azabu;  her  father  owned  a  trading company  and  her  mother  played  tennis  with  expatriates  in  a  private  club. 

Akiko adored rough sex, foreign books, and talking. She had pursued him, and Noa, who had never had a serious girlfriend before, did not know what to make of her. 

“Come back to me,” she said flirtatiously, fingering her white cotton top. 

Noa retreated to the futon. 

After making love between classes, they had been lolling in Noa’s rented room—an exceptionally large living space for a university student, with two square windows that let in the morning light and immense floor space for a double futon and a furry beige rug. Thick piles of novels covered his large pine  desk—Dickens,  Tolstoy,  Balzac,  and  Hugo.  The  fancy  electric  lamp with a green glass shade was off. Noa couldn’t have conceived of anything as  nice  as  this  room  and  could  not  believe  his  luck  at  the  incredibly  low rent. Hansu’s friend was the landlord, and it had come furnished with new, elegant things—ideal for a student studying literature and English. Noa had had to bring only his clothes packed in his father’s old suitcase. 

Akiko  claimed  that  none  of  the  other  students  lived  in  a  place  as  nice, even if they lived at home in Tokyo. She lived in a beautiful apartment with her family in Minami-Azabu, but in a room half the size of his; she spent all her free time between classes at his place. Her things were on his desk, in his  bathroom,  and  in  his  closet.  The  commonplace  idea  that  girls  were neater than boys was not true in her case. 

Despite  Akiko’s  best  efforts,  Noa  couldn’t  do  it  again  so  soon. 

Embarrassed, he finished dressing. She, too, rose to fix herself a cup of tea. 

There was no kitchen here, but Noa had an electric kettle that Hansu had bought  for  him.  All  Noa  had  to  do  was  study,  Hansu  had  said.  “Learn everything  you  can.  Learn  for  all  the  Koreans,  for  every  Korean  who couldn’t go to a school like Waseda.” Hansu paid the tuition in full before

the start of each term. Freed from worrying about money, Noa studied more fervently  than  he  ever  had.  He  reread  books  and  studied  as  many  critical essays  as  he  could  find.  His  only  relief  from  work  was  this  lovely  girl whom he had fallen for. She was brilliant, sensual, and creative. 

“What  is  he  like?”  Akiko  asked,  sprinkling  tea  leaves  into  the  iron teapot. 

“Who?” 

“Koh Hansu, your benefactor. You’re leaving me in ten minutes to meet him. You do this on the first of the month.” 

Noa  hadn’t  told  her,  but  of  course,  she  had  guessed.  Akiko  wanted  to meet Hansu. She had asked numerous times if she could tag along, but Noa did not think it was appropriate. 

“He’s  a  good  friend  of  the  family.  I  told  you.  My  mother  and grandmother knew him before they came to Japan. He’s from Jeju, which is not very far from Busan. He owns a construction company.” 

“Is he good-looking?” 

“What?” 

“Like you. Korean men are really good-looking.” 

Noa smiled. What could he say to this? Of course, not all Korean men were good-looking, and not all Korean men were bad-looking, either. They were just men. Akiko liked to make positive generalizations about Koreans and other foreigners. She reserved her harshest words for well-off Japanese. 

Akiko put down her teacup and pushed him down on the futon playfully, and  Noa  fell  on  his  back.  She  straddled  him  and  removed  her  shirt.  She wore  a  white  cotton  bra  and  panties.  She  looked  so  beautiful,  he  thought. 

Her black hair fell like glossy, iridescent feathers around her face. 

“Is he like you?” She rubbed against him. 

“No,  no.  We’re  very  different.”  Noa  exhaled  and  removed  her  gently from his hips, puzzled himself by his answer. “I mean, I don’t know. He’s a generous man. I told you before: He doesn’t have a son, and his daughters don’t want to go to university, so he has been supporting me. I intend to pay him  back.  He’s  helped  my  family  in  difficult  times.  He’s  my  benefactor; that’s all.” 

“Why do you have to pay him back? Isn’t he loaded?” 

“I don’t know.” Noa went to get his socks from the dresser. “It doesn’t matter. It’s a debt. I will pay him back.” 

“Don’t  you  want  to  stay  with  me?”  Akiko  removed  her  brassiere  to reveal her champagne glass–sized tits. 

“You are tempting me, my beauty,” he said. “But I must get going. I will see you tomorrow,  nee?” 

There was absolutely no time to have sex again, he told himself, even if he could get another erection, which he doubted. 

“Can’t I come and meet him, Noa-chan? When will I meet your family?” 

“He’s not my family, and I don’t know. I haven’t met yours, either.” 

“You don’t want to meet Mother and Father. They are racists,” she said. 

“Honto desu.” 

“Oh,” Noa said. “I will see you tomorrow. Lock up, please.” 

The  sushi-ya  was  less  than  a  mile  away  from  his  place.  The  interior  was recently repaneled in fresh cedar, and the walls gave off the faint scent of clean,  new  wood.  Hansu  preferred  to  meet  Noa  here  each  month  in  the private room in the back. No one ever disturbed them except to bring them course  after  course  of  exceptional  delicacies,  brought  in  from  various remote fishing villages in Japan. 

Normally,  the  two  men  talked  about  his  classes,  because  Hansu  was curious  about  what  it  was  like  to  attend  such  a  wondrous  and  fabled university.  He  had  never  attended  secondary  school  or  university.  Hansu had taught himself both how to read and write Korean and Japanese from books, and as soon as he could afford it, Hansu had hired tutors to learn the kanji  and   hanja  necessary  to  read  difficult  Japanese  and  Korean newspapers. He knew many rich men, strong men, and brave men, yet he was  most  impressed  with  educated  men  who  could  write  well.  He  sought friendships with great journalists, because he admired their well-composed thoughts and points of view on the issues of the day. Hansu did not believe in nationalism, religion, or even love, but he trusted in education. Above all, he believed that a man must learn constantly. He loathed waste of any kind, and when all three of his daughters forsook school for baubles and gossip, he grew to despise his wife, who had allowed this to happen. The girls had good  minds  and  unlimited  resources,  and  she  had  let  them  throw  these things away like garbage. The girls were lost to him, but he now had Noa. It

thrilled  him  that  Noa  could  read  and  write  English  so  beautifully—a language he knew was essential in the world. Noa had recommended books to him, and Hansu had read them, because he wanted to know the things his son knew. 

The young man’s extraordinary scholarship was something Hansu knew he had to nurture. Hansu was not sure what he wanted Noa to do when he graduated; he was careful not to say too much, because it was clear that Noa had some of his own ideas. Hansu wanted to back him, the way he wanted to back good business plans. 

The two sat cross-legged on the pristine tatami floor with a low acacia wood table between them. 

“You should have more of the sea urchin. The chef had it brought for us from Hokkaido last night,” Hansu said. He enjoyed watching Noa, a poor student, eat these rare things that he himself consumed regularly. 

Noa  nodded  in  appreciation  and  finished  his  portion.  He  didn’t  enjoy eating this way or even this kind of food. Noa knew how proper Japanese people  behaved  and  could  imitate  their  mannerisms  faultlessly,  so  he  ate whatever was put in front of him and was grateful. However, he preferred to eat a nourishing bowl of simple food quickly and be done with it. He ate the way  most  working  Koreans  did:  Tasty  food  was  merely  necessary  fuel, something to be eaten in a rush so you could return to your work. Well-off Japanese  considered  this  sort  of  eating—high  volume,  strong  flavors,  and deliberate speed—nothing short of vulgar. In his benefactor’s presence, Noa aped  the  ruling-class  Japanese,  not  wishing  to  disappoint  Hansu,  yet  Noa was simply not interested in food or sitting still very long for a meal. Akiko teased him about this as well, but they did not go to luxurious restaurants, so it was of little consequence in their relationship. 

Noa liked being with Hansu, but it was tedious watching another person drink while eating so little. Obviously, Hansu could drink a great deal and somehow  manage  a  successful  construction  company,  but  Noa  was suspicious of any form of drinking. As a little boy on his way to school, he used to have to step over grown men who were sleeping off their drunken binges from the night before. When he worked as a bookkeeper for the real estate company in Ikaino, he had seen many fathers unable to pay the rent, resulting  in  their  families  being  thrown  out  of  their  homes—the  trouble having  started  with  a  few  harmless  drinks  on  payday.  And  every  winter, 

homeless  alcoholic  Koreans  froze  to  death  near  the  Sumida  River,  their bodies  unaware  of  the  deadly  frost.  Noa  didn’t  drink.  Hansu  could  drink bottles  of  sake  or  soju  without  any  visible  effect,  so  in  accordance  with Korean tradition, Noa poured his elder’s drink, cup after cup, dragging the precious meal out even further. 

As Noa was pouring the sake into the Oribe sake cup, the gentle knock on the paper screen door startled him. 

“Enter,” Hansu said. 

“Excuse me, Koh-san,” said the young waitress, who had no makeup on. 

She wore a simple indigo day kimono with a mushroom-colored obi. 

“Yes?” Hansu said. 

Noa  smiled  at  the  waitress,  who  looked  and  behaved  like  a  well-mannered girl child. 

“There is a lady who says she would like to say hello to you.” 

“Really?” Hansu said. “To me?” 

“Yes.” The waitress nodded. 

“Very well,” Hansu said. Few people knew that he ate at this restaurant. 

It  was  possible  that  one  of  his  boss’s  secretaries  was  bringing  a  private message  for  him,  but  that  was  odd,  because  more  commonly,  young  men from the company were sent on such errands. Hansu’s driver and bodyguard were  outside  the  restaurant  standing  guard;  they  would  have  prevented anyone dangerous from reaching him. They would have examined her for certain. 

The waitress closed the door, and in a few moments knocked again. 

This time, Noa rose to his feet and opened the door himself. It felt good to stretch his legs. 

“Akiko,” Noa said, his mouth momentarily agape. 

“Hello,” she said, standing by the waitress, waiting to be invited in. 

“Is this your friend, Noa?” Hansu asked, smiling at this gorgeous thing who looked Japanese. 

“Yes.” 

“Welcome. Please have a seat. You wanted to see me?” 

“Noa thought I should stop by and say hello to his benefactor, so I came by at his insistence,” Akiko said, smiling. 

“Yes,” Noa said, not sure why he was agreeing to this story but lacking an  alternative  narrative.  “I  should  have  mentioned  that  Akiko  might  be

stopping by. I’m sorry if I took you by surprise.” 

“Not at all. I’m very happy to meet a friend of Noa. You must join us for lunch.” 

Hansu looked up at the waitress, who was still standing by the door. 

“Please  bring  another  setting  and  a  sake  cup  for  Noa’s  friend,”  Hansu said, feeling both curious and pleased that the boy would want him to meet his girlfriend. He wanted to welcome her. 

Immediately,  a  place  setting  and  a  wine  cup  appeared  before  her.  The chef himself brought them a dish of fried oysters sprinkled with transparent flakes of English salt. Noa poured Hansu a cup of wine, then Hansu poured a cup for Akiko. 

“To new friends,” Hansu said, raising his cup. 

19

The young couple remained standing by the restaurant door as Hansu got into his car. Akiko and Noa bowed deep from the waist in the direction of the rear passenger seat, where Hansu was seated. The chauffeur closed the passenger  door,  bowed  to  the  couple,  then  got  behind  the  wheel  to  take Hansu to his next meeting. 

“I don’t see why you’re so upset,” Akiko said, still smiling like a proper Japanese  schoolgirl,  though  Hansu  was  already  gone.  “Koh-san  is wonderful. I’m glad I met him.” 

“You  lied,”  Noa  said,  his  voice  trembling.  He  didn’t  want  to  speak  for fear of saying something awful, but he couldn’t help himself. “I…I didn’t invite you to the lunch. Why did you say that to Koh-san? The lunch could have turned out badly. This man is important to our family. He’s supporting my education. I owe him a great deal.” 

“Nothing  happened.  It  was  an  ordinary  lunch  with  relatives  at  a  fancy sushi-ya.  Big  deal.  I’ve  been  to  dozens  of  them.  I  behaved  perfectly.  He liked  me,”  Akiko  said,  puzzled  by  his  irritation.  She  had  always  been confident of her ability to win grown-ups over. 

“Are you ashamed of me?” Akiko asked, laughing, strangely delighted to be having a fight with Noa, who was normally so calm and silent that she didn’t know what went through his mind. Besides, it was his fault: He was so difficult to understand, she’d felt compelled to go to this lunch without an invitation. She hadn’t done it to upset him. He should have been pleased that she cared enough about him to get to know his friends. 

“You would never have let me. I was right to go.” She touched his arm, and he moved away. 

“Akiko, why, why do you always have to be right? Why do you always

have to have the upper hand? Why can’t I decide when and where you can meet someone personal to me? I would never do this to you. I would respect your privacy,” Noa sputtered, and he put his hand over his mouth. 

Akiko  stared  at  him,  not  understanding.  She  was  not  used  to  a  man saying no to her. His cheeks were flushed; he was having trouble getting the words out. This wasn’t the same man who would explain difficult passages of her sociology texts to her or help her with her statistics homework. Her gentle and wise Noa was furious. 

“What is it? Is it that you are embarrassed that you are Korean?” 

“What?” Noa took a step back. He looked around to see if anyone could hear their argument. “What are you saying?” He looked at her as if she was deranged. 

Akiko grew calm and she spoke slowly. 

“I’m not embarrassed that you are Korean. I think it’s great that you are Korean. It doesn’t bother me at all. It might bother any ignorant person or even my racist parents, but I love that you are Korean. Koreans are smart and hardworking, and the men are so handsome,” she said, smiling at him like she was flirting. “You are upset. Listen, if you want, I can arrange for you to meet my whole family. They’d be lucky to meet such an excellent Korean. It would change the way they—” 

“No,” he said, shaking his head. “No. No more of this.” 

Akiko moved closer to him. An older woman passed by and glanced at them, but Akiko didn’t pay her any attention. 

“Noa-chan, why are you so angry with me? You know that I think you’re the best. Let’s go home, and you can fuck me.” 

Noa stared at her. She would always believe that he was someone else, that he wasn’t himself but some fanciful idea of a foreign person; she would always feel like she was someone special because she had condescended to be  with  someone  everyone  else  hated.  His  presence  would  prove  to  the world that she was a good person, an educated person, a liberal person. Noa didn’t care about being Korean when he was with her; in fact, he didn’t care about being Korean or Japanese with anyone. He wanted to be, to be just himself, whatever that meant; he wanted to forget himself sometimes. But that wasn’t possible. It would never be possible with her. 

“I  will  pack  up  your  things  and  have  them  sent  to  your  house  by messenger.  I  don’t  want  to  see  you  anymore.  Please  never  come  see  me

again.” 

“Noa, what are you saying?” Akiko said, astonished. “Is this the Korean temper that I’ve never seen before?” She laughed. 

“You and I. It cannot be.” 

“Why?” 

“Because  it  cannot.”  There  was  nothing  else  he  could  think  of,  and  he wanted to spare her the cruelty of what he had learned, because she would not  believe  that  she  was  no  different  than  her  parents,  that  seeing  him  as only  Korean—good  or  bad—was  the  same  as  seeing  him  only  as  a  bad Korean.  She  could  not  see  his  humanity,  and  Noa  realized  that  this  was what he wanted most of all: to be seen as human. 

“He’s your father, isn’t he?” Akiko said. “He looks exactly like you. You told  me  your  father  died,  but  he’s  not  dead.  You  just  didn’t  want  him  to meet me, because you didn’t want me to meet your yakuza papa. And you didn’t want me to know that he’s a gangster. How else do you explain that ridiculous car and uniformed chauffeur? How else can he put you up in that enormous  apartment?  Even  my  father  can’t  afford  that  apartment,  and  he owns a trading company! Come on, Noa, how can you get mad at me when all I wanted was to learn more about you? I don’t care about what he does. 

It doesn’t matter—I don’t mind that you’re Korean. Don’t you see?” 

Noa turned around and walked away. He walked until he couldn’t hear her scream his name anymore. He walked rigidly and calmly, not believing that  a  person  you  loved—yes,  he  had  loved  her—could  end  up  being someone you never knew. Perhaps he had known all along about her, but he couldn’t  see  it.  He  just  couldn’t.  When  Noa  reached  the  train  station,  he went down the stairs to the platform slowly. He felt like he might fall down. 

He would take the first train to Osaka. 

It was early evening when he reached the house. His Aunt Kyunghee started when she answered the door. He was distraught and wanted to speak to his mother. Uncle Yoseb was sleeping in the back room, and his mother was in the front room sewing. He wouldn’t take off his coat. When Sunja came to the door, Noa asked if they could go outside to talk. 

“What? What’s the matter?” Sunja asked, putting on her shoes. 

Noa wouldn’t answer. He went outside to wait for her. 

Noa  led  her  away  from  the  shopping  street  to  a  spot  where  there  were very few people. 

“Is it true?” Noa asked his mother. “About Koh Hansu.” 

He couldn’t say the words out loud exactly, but he had to know. 

“Why  he  pays  for  my  school,  and  why  he’s  always  been  around.  You were together—” he said. It was easier to say this than the other thing. 

Sunja  had  been  buttoning  her  faded  woolen  coat,  and  she  stopped walking and stared at her son’s face. She understood. Yoseb had been right all along. She shouldn’t have allowed Hansu to pay for his education. But she hadn’t been able to find another way. Noa had gone to work each day and  saved  every  bit  of  his  earnings  and  studied  every  night  until  his  eyes were  red-rimmed  in  the  morning,  and  he  had  finally  passed  the  entrance examination for Waseda. 

How could she have said no? There were no loans for this. There was no one else who could help. She had always been afraid of Hansu’s presence in Noa’s life. Would that money keep Noa tied to Hansu? she had wondered. 

But not to take the money. Was that possible? 

A  child  like  Noa,  a  child  who  worked  so  hard,  deserved  to  fulfill  his wish to study and to become someone. Throughout his life, Noa’s teachers had  said  that  he  was  an  ideal  student,  far  smarter  than  anyone  else;  “A credit to your country,” they’d said, and this had pleased her husband, Isak, so  much,  because  he  knew  the  Japanese  thought  Koreans  were  worth  so little, fit only for the dirty, dangerous, and demeaning tasks. Isak had said that Noa would help the Korean people by his excellence of character and workmanship, and that no one would be able to look down on him. Isak had encouraged  the  boy  to  know  everything  as  well  as  he  could,  and  Noa,  a good son, had tried his best to be the very best. Isak had loved the boy so much. Sunja could not say anything, and her mouth was dry. All she could think of was how good Isak had been to give Noa a name and to give them his protection. 

“How could this be?” Noa shook his head. “How could you betray him?” 

Sunja knew he meant Isak, and she tried to explain. 

“I  met  him  before  I  met  your  father.  I  didn’t  know  Koh  Hansu  was married.  I  was  a  girl,  and  I  believed  that  he  would  marry  me.  But  he couldn’t, because he was already married. When I was pregnant with you, 

your  father,  Isak,  stayed  at  our  inn;  he  married  me  even  when  he  knew. 

Baek Isak wanted you as his son. Blood doesn’t matter. Can you understand that? When you are young, you can make serious mistakes. You can trust the  wrong  people,  but  I  am  so  grateful  to  have  you  as  my  son  and  so grateful to your father for marrying me—” 

“No.”  He  looked  at  her  with  disdain.  “This  kind  of  mistake  I  cannot understand. Why didn’t you tell me sooner? Who else knows?” His voice grew colder. 

“I  didn’t  think  it  was  necessary  to  tell  anyone.  Listen  to  me,  Noa,  the man who chose to be your father is Baek—” 

Noa acted like he didn’t even hear her. 

“Then  Uncle  Yoseb  and  Aunt  Kyunghee—do  they  know?”  His  mind couldn’t accept that no one had told him this. 

“We’ve never discussed it.” 

“And Mozasu? He is Baek Isak’s son? He doesn’t look like me.” 

Sunja  nodded.  Noa  called  his  father  Baek  Isak;  he’d  never  done  that before. 

“My half brother then—” 

“I met Koh Hansu before your father. I’ve always been faithful to Baek Isak—my  only  husband.  Koh  Hansu  found  us  when  your  father  was  in prison. He was worried that we didn’t have money.” 

A part of her had always feared Noa finding out, but even against such a possibility, she had trusted that Noa would understand, because he was so smart  and  had  always  been  such  an  easy  child—the  one  who  never  made her worry. But the young man who stood in front of her was like cold metal, and he looked at her as if he could not remember who she was to him. 

Noa  stopped  moving  and  took  a  deep  breath,  then  exhaled,  because  he felt so dizzy. 

“That’s  why  he’s  always  helping  us—why  he  found  that  farm  for  us during the war. Why he brought us things.” 

“He was trying to make sure that you were okay. He wanted to help you. 

It had nothing to do with me. I was someone he knew a long time ago.” 

“You know that he’s a yakuza? Is that right?” 

“No. No, I do not know that. I do not know what he does. He used to be a wholesale fish broker who lived in Osaka when I knew him. He bought fish in Korea for Japanese companies. He was a businessman. He owns a

construction  company  and  restaurants,  I  think.  I  don’t  know  what  else  he does. I hardly ever speak to him. You know that—” 

“Yakuza  are  the  filthiest  people  in  Japan.  They  are  thugs;  they  are common criminals. They frighten shopkeepers; they sell drugs; they control prostitution;  and  they  hurt  innocent  people.  All  the  worst  Koreans  are members of these gangs. I took money for my education from a yakuza, and you thought this was acceptable? I will never be able to wash this dirt from my  name.  You  can’t  be  very  bright,”  he  said.  “How  can  you  make something clean from something dirty? And now, you have made me dirty,” 

Noa said quietly, as if he was learning this as he was saying it to her. “All my  life,  I  have  had  Japanese  telling  me  that  my  blood  is  Korean—that Koreans are angry, violent, cunning, and deceitful criminals. All my life, I had to endure this. I tried to be as honest and humble as Baek Isak was; I never raised my voice. But this blood, my blood is Korean, and now I learn that my blood is yakuza blood. I can never change this, no matter what I do. 

It would have been better if I were never born. How could you have ruined my life? How could you be so imprudent? A foolish mother and a criminal father. I am cursed.” 

Sunja  looked  at  him  with  shock.  If  he  had  been  a  little  boy,  she  might have told him to hush, to mind his manners, never to dishonor your parents, but she couldn’t say that now. How could she defend gangsters? There were organized criminals everywhere, she supposed, and she knew that they did bad  things,  but  she  knew  that  many  of  the  Koreans  had  to  work  for  the gangs because there were no other jobs for them. The government and good companies wouldn’t hire Koreans, even educated ones. All these men had to work, and there were many of them who lived in their neighborhood who were  far  kinder  and  more  respectful  than  the  men  who  didn’t  work  at  all. 

She couldn’t say this to her son, however, because Noa was someone who had  studied,  labored,  and  tried  to  lift  himself  out  of  their  street,  and  he thought  all  the  men  who  hadn’t  done  so  weren’t  very  bright,  either.  He would not understand. Her son could not feel compassion for those who did not try. 

“Noa,” Sunja said, “forgive me.  Umma is sorry. I just wanted you to go to school. I know how much you wanted that. I know how hard you—” 

“You. You took my life away. I am no longer myself,” he said, pointing his finger at her. He turned around and walked back to the train. 

20

Osaka, April 1962

They  didn’t  receive  letters  often,  and  when  one  arrived,  the  family gathered around Yoseb’s bedside to hear it read. He was lying on his back, his  head  propped  up  by  a  buckwheat-filled  pillow.  Of  course,  Sunja recognized  her  son’s  handwriting  on  the  envelope.  Though  illiterate,  she was  able  to  make  out  her  name  and  signs  in  both  Japanese  and  Korean. 

Normally, Kyunghee read the letters out loud, asking Yoseb for help when there were difficult characters she could not recognize. Yoseb’s vision had worsened; he was unable to read his beloved newspapers, so Kyunghee read them to him. If Kyunghee described the image of the character, Yoseb could sometimes  guess  it  from  the  context.  Kyunghee  read  in  her  clear,  mild-toned voice. Sunja’s face was white with fear, and Yangjin stared at the thin sheet of paper, wondering what her grandson had to say. Yoseb’s eyes were closed, but he was awake. 

 Umma, 

 I have withdrawn from Waseda. I have moved out of the apartment. I am in a new city and have found a job. 

 This may be very difficult for you to understand, but I ask that you not look for me. I have thought about this very deeply. This is the best way for me to live with myself and to maintain my integrity. I want to start a

 new life, and to do that there is no other way. 

 I  have  had  to  pay  some  bills  in  starting  out,  and  as  soon  as  I  earn some more money, I will send you something as often as I can. I will not neglect my duties. Also, I will earn enough money to repay Koh Hansu. 

 Please make sure that he never reaches me. I do not wish to know him. 

 I  send  regards  to  you,  Uncle  Yoseb,  Aunt  Kyunghee,  Grandmother, and Mozasu. I am sorry I did not get a chance to say good-bye properly, but I will not be returning. Please do not worry about me. This cannot be helped. 

 Your son, 

 Noa

Noa  had  written  his  brief  message  in  simple  Japanese  rather  than Korean,  a  language  he  had  never  written  well.  When  Kyunghee  finished reading, no one said anything. Yangjin patted her daughter’s knee, then got up  to  go  to  the  kitchen  to  fix  dinner,  leaving  Kyunghee  to  put  her  arm around her sister-in-law, who now sat wordless and pale. 

Yoseb  exhaled.  Would  anything  bring  the  boy  back?  he  wondered.  He did not think so. This life had too much loss. When Isak died, Yoseb had thought of his brother’s little boys and vowed to watch over them. Noa and Mozasu were not his own, but what did that matter? He had wanted to be a good man for them. Then after the war, after his accident, he had resigned himself  to  death  and  looked  forward  only  to  the  boys’  future.  The  stupid heart  could  not  help  but  hope.  Life  had  seemed  almost  bearable;  though Yoseb was nearly cut off from the living, confined to his pallet, his family had persisted. Life continued. To Yoseb, Noa had seemed so much like Isak that it had been possible to forget that the boy’s blood father was someone else—someone wholly different from his gentle Isak. But now, the poor boy had learned somehow that he had descended from another line. The boy had decided  to  leave  them,  and  his  departure  was  punishment.  Yoseb  could understand the boy’s anger, but he wanted another chance to talk to him, to tell Noa that a man must learn to forgive—to know what is important, that to  live  without  forgiveness  was  a  kind  of  death  with  breathing  and movement.  However,  Yoseb  did  not  have  enough  energy  to  rise  from  his pallet,  let  alone  search  for  his  dear  nephew,  a  boy  who  was  like  his  own

flesh.

Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

“Could he have gone to the North?” Kyunghee asked her husband. “He wouldn’t do something like that, isn’t that so?” 

Sunja glanced at her brother-in-law. 

“No,  no.”  Yoseb’s  pillow  made  a  gravelly  noise  as  he  moved  his  head from side to side. 

Sunja covered her eyes with her hands. No one who went to the North came  back.  There  was  still  hope  as  long  as  he  had  not  gone  there.  Kim Changho  had  left  in  the  last  month  of  1959,  and  in  more  than  two  years, they’d  heard  from  him  only  twice.  Kyunghee  rarely  spoke  of  him,  but  it made sense that her first thought was Pyongyang. 

“And  Mozasu?  What  do  we  tell  him?”  Kyunghee  asked.  Still  holding Noa’s letter, she patted Sunja’s back with her free hand. 

“Wait until he asks about him. The boy is so busy as it is. If he asks, just say you don’t know. Then later, if you have to, tell him that his brother ran away,” Yoseb said, his eyes still shut. “Tell him that school was too hard for Noa, so he left Tokyo and he was too ashamed to return home after all those attempts to get into school. For all we know, that could be the reason.” It sickened Yoseb to say these words, so he said nothing else. 

Sunja couldn’t speak. Mozasu would never believe that, yet she couldn’t tell him the truth, either, because he would go look for his brother. And she could  not  tell  Mozasu  about  Hansu.  Mozasu  was  hardly  sleeping  lately, because he had so many responsibilities at work, and Yumi had miscarried only a few weeks before. The boy did not need any more worries. 

Since  that  evening  when  Noa  had  come  home  from  school  to  speak  to her, Sunja had thought daily of going to Tokyo to talk to him, but she could not do so. A month had passed and now this. What did he say to her?  You took  my  life  away.   He  had  withdrawn  from  Waseda.  Sunja  felt  unable  to think,  to  breathe  even.  All  she  wanted  was  to  see  her  son  again.  If  that wasn’t possible, it would be better to die. 

Wiping her wet hands on her apron, Yangjin came out of the kitchen and told them that dinner was ready. Yangjin and Kyunghee stared at Sunja. 

“You should eat something,” Kyunghee said. 

Sunja shook her head. “I have to go. I have to find him.” 

Kyunghee clutched her arm, but Sunja broke free and got up. 

“Let her go to him,” Yangjin said. 

  

It  turned  out  that  Hansu  lived  only  thirty  minutes  away  by  train.  His preposterously immense house stood out prominently on the quiet street. A pair  of  tall,  carved  mahogany  doors,  flanked  by  grand  picture  windows, centered the two-story limestone structure like a giant maw. The house had been the residence of an American diplomat after the war. Heavy drapery shaded the interiors, making it impossible to look inside. As a young girl, Sunja  had  imagined  where  he  might  live,  but  she  could  never  have conceived of anything like this. He lived in a castle, it seemed to her. The taxi driver assured her that this was the address. 

A  young,  short-haired  servant  girl  wearing  a  shimmering  white  apron answered  the  door,  opening  it  only  halfway.  The  master  of  the  house  was not in, she said in Japanese. 

“Who’s  that?”  an  older  woman  asked,  emerging  from  the  front  parlor. 

She tapped the servant girl lightly, and she moved aside. The door opened fully to expose the grand entryway. 

Sunja realized who this must be. 

“Koh Hansu, please,” she said in her best Japanese. “Please.” 

“Who are you?” 

“My name is Boku Sunja.” 

Hansu’s wife, Mieko, nodded. The beggar was no doubt a Korean who wanted  money.  The  postwar  Koreans  were  numerous  and  shameless,  and they  took  advantage  of  her  husband’s  soft  nature  toward  his  countrymen. 

She  did  not  begrudge  his  generosity,  but  she  disapproved  of  the  beggars’

boldness. It was evening, and this was no time for a woman of any age to beg. 

Mieko turned to the servant girl, “Give her what she wants and send her away.  There’s  food  in  the  kitchen  if  she  is  hungry.”  This  was  what  her husband  would  do.  Her  father  had  also  believed  in  hospitality  toward  the poor. 

The servant bowed as the mistress walked away. 

“No,  no,”  Sunja  said  in  Japanese.  “No  money,  no  food.  Speak  Koh Hansu, please. Please.” She clasped her hands together as if in prayer. 

Mieko returned, taking deliberate steps. Koreans could be insistent like unruly  children.  They  could  be  loud  and  desperate,  with  none  of  the

coolness and placidity of the Japanese. Her children were half of this blood, but fortunately, they did not raise their voices or have slovenly habits. Her father had loved Hansu, claiming that he was not like the others and that it would  be  good  for  her  to  marry  him,  because  he  was  a  real  man  and  he would  take  care  of  her.  Her  father  was  not  wrong;  under  her  husband’s direction, the organization had only grown stronger and wealthier. She and her daughters had enormous wealth in Switzerland as well as innumerable fat  packets  of  yen  hidden  in  the  stone  walls  of  this  house.  She  lacked  for nothing. 

“How did you learn that he lives here? How do you know my husband?” 

Mieko asked Sunja. 

Sunja  shook  her  head,  because  she  didn’t  understand  exactly  what  the woman  was  asking.  She  understood  the  word  “husband.”  His  wife  was clearly  Japanese—early  sixties  with  gray  hair,  cut  short.  She  was  very beautiful, with large dark eyes fringed with unusually long lashes. She wore a light green kimono over her elegant frame. The rouge on her lips was the color of  umeboshi. She looked like a kimono model. 

“Fetch  the  garden  boy.  He  speaks  Korean.”  Hansu’s  wife  extended  her left hand and gestured to Sunja to remain by the door. She noted the rough and worn cotton clothing and the tired hands, spotted from outdoor work. 

The Korean could not be very old; there was some prettiness in her eyes, but  her  youth  was  spent.  Her  waist  was  thick  from  childbearing.  She  was not attractive enough to be one of Hansu’s whores. To her knowledge, all of Hansu’s  whores  were  Japanese  hostesses,  some  younger  than  their daughters. They knew better than to grace her doorstep. 

The  garden  boy  came  running  to  the  front  of  the  house  from  the backyard, where he’d been weeding. 

“Yes, ma’am,” he said, bowing to the mistress of the house. 

“She’s  a  Korean,”  Mieko  said.  “Ask  her  how  she  learned  where  the master lives.” 

The  boy  glanced  at  Sunja,  who  looked  terrified.  She  wore  a  light  gray coat over her cotton work clothes. She was younger than his mother. 

“Ajumoni,”  he  said  to  Sunja,  trying  not  to  alarm  her.  “How  can  I  help you?” 

Sunja smiled at the boy, then, seeing the concern in his eyes, she burst into tears. He had none of the hardness of the house servant and the wife. 

“I’m looking for my son, you see, and I think your master knows where he is. I need to speak”—she had to stop speaking to breathe through her tearful gulps—“to your master. Do you know where he is?” 

“How does she know my husband lives here?” Hansu’s wife asked again calmly. 

In  his  wish  to  help  the  desperate  woman,  the  boy  had  forgotten  his mistress’s request. 

“The mistress wants to know how you know that the master lives here. 

 Ajumoni, I have to give her an answer; do you understand?” The boy peered into Sunja’s face. 

“I  worked  for  Kim  Changho  at  a  restaurant  your  master  owned.  Kim Changho gave me your master’s address to me before he left for the North. 

Did you know Mr. Kim? He went to Pyongyang.” 

The  boy  nodded,  recalling  the  tall  man  with  the  thick  eyeglasses  who always gave him pocket money for candy and played soccer with him in the backyard. Mr. Kim had offered to take the boy with him to the North on the Red  Cross  ship,  but  his  master  had  forbidden  it.  The  master  never  spoke about Mr. Kim and would get angry if anyone brought him up. 

Sunja stared hard at the boy as if he could find Noa himself. 

“You see, your master might know where my son is. I have to go find him. Do you think you can tell me where your master is? Is he here now? I know he would see me.” 

The  boy  looked  down  and  shook  his  head,  and  at  that  moment,  Sunja looked up and started to take in the interior of Hansu’s house. 

The magnificent, cavernous foyer behind the boy resembled the interior of  an  old  train  station  with  its  high  ceilings  and  pale  white  walls.  She imagined  Hansu  descending  the  carved  cherrywood  staircase  to  ask  what was  the  matter.  This  time,  she  would  beg  for  his  help  in  a  way  she  had never done before. She would plead for his mercy, for all of his resources, and she would not leave his side until her son was found. 

The boy turned to the mistress and translated everything Sunja had said. 

Hansu’s wife studied the weeping woman. 

“Tell her that he is away. That he will be gone for a long time.” Mieko turned around and while walking away said, “If she needs any train fare or food, send her to the back and give her what she needs; otherwise, send her away.” 

“Ajumoni, do you need any money or food?” he asked. 

“No, no. I just need to speak to your master. Please, child. Please help me,” Sunja said. 

The  boy  shrugged,  because  he  didn’t  know  where  Hansu  was.  The servant, her white apron glinting in the brilliant electric lights of the foyer, stood by the door like a maiden sentry and looked off into the distance as if to give these poor, messy people some privacy. 

“Ajumoni, I’m sorry, but my mistress wants you to leave. Would you like to go to the kitchen? In the back of the house? I can get you something to eat. The mistress said—” 

“No. No.” 

The maid closed the front door quietly, while the boy remained outside. 

He had never walked through the front door and never expected to do so. 

Sunja turned to the darkened street. A half-moon was visible in the navy-colored  sky.  The  mistress  had  returned  to  the  parlor  to  study  her  flower magazines, and the servant resumed her work in the pantry. From the house, the boy watched Sunja walking toward the main road. He wanted to tell her that  the  master  came  home  every  now  and  then,  but  rarely  slept  at  home when he returned. He traveled all over the country for his work. The master and the mistress were very polite to one another, but they did not seem like an ordinary husband and wife. Perhaps this was the way of rich people, the boy thought. They were nothing like his own parents. His father had been a carpenter before he died from a bad liver. His mother, who never stopped working,  had  doted  on  him,  though  he’d  never  made  any  money.  The gardener  boy  knew  that  the  master  stayed  in  a  hotel  in  Osaka  sometimes; the  head  servants  and  the  cook  talked  about  his  mansion  apartment  in Tokyo, but none of them had been there except for the driver, Yasuda. The boy  had  never  given  it  much  thought.  He  had  never  been  to  Tokyo  or anywhere else besides Osaka, where he was born, and Nagoya, where his family now lived. The only people who would ever know for certain where the master would be were Yasuda and his brawny guard Chiko, but it had never  occurred  to  the  boy  to  ask  them  the  master’s  whereabouts. 

Sometimes, the master went to Korea or Hong Kong, they said. 

The  streets  were  empty  except  for  the  Korean  woman’s  small  figure walking slowly toward the train station, and the gardener boy ran quickly to catch up with her. 

“Ajumoni,  ajumoni, where, where do you live?” 

Sunja  stopped  and  turned  to  the  boy,  wondering  if  he  might  know something. 

“In Ikaino. Do you know the shopping street?” 

The boy nodded, hunched over and holding his knees to catch his breath. 

He stared at her round face. 

“I live three blocks from the shopping street by the large bathhouse. My name  is  Baek  Sunja  or  Sunja  Boku.  I  live  in  the  house  with  my  mother, brother-in-law, and sister-in-law, Baek Yoseb and Choi Kyunghee. Just ask anyone where the lady who sells sweets lives. I also sell confections in the train  station  market  with  my  mother.  I’m  always  at  the  market.  Will  you come find me if you know where Koh Hansu is? And when you see him, will you tell him that I need to see him?” Sunja asked. 

“Yes, I will try. We don’t see him often.” The boy stopped there, because it didn’t seem right to tell her that Hansu was never home. He had not seen him in many months, maybe even a year. “But if I see my master, I’ll tell him that you came by. I’m sure the mistress will tell him, too.” 

“Here.” Sunja fished in her purse to find some money for the boy. 

“No,  no,  thank  you.  I  have  everything  I  need.  I’m  all  right.”  The  boy looked  at  the  worn  rubber  soles  of  her  shoes;  they  looked  identical  to  the ones his mother wore to the market. 

“You’re a good boy,” she said, and Sunja started to cry again, because all her life, Noa had been her joy. He had been a steady source of strength for her when she had expected so little from this life. 

“My  umma  works  in  a  market  in  Nagoya;  she  helps  another  lady  who sells vegetables,” he found himself telling her. He had not seen his mother and sisters since New Year’s. The only person he spoke to in Korean here was with the master himself. 

“She must wish to see you, too.” 

Sunja smiled weakly at the boy, feeling sorry for him. She touched his shoulder, then walked to the train station. 

BOOK III

Pachinko

1962–1989

 

I  propose  the  following  definition  of  the  nation:  it  is  an imagined  political  community—and  imagined  as  both inherently limited and sovereign. 

It  is   imagined  because  the  members  of  even  the smallest  nation  will  never  know  most  of  their  fellow-members,  meet  them,  or  even  hear  of  them,  yet  in  the minds of each lives the image of their communion…

The  nation  is  imagined  as   limited  because  even  the largest  of  them,  encompassing  perhaps  a  billion  living human  beings,  has  finite,  if  elastic,  boundaries,  beyond which lie other nations…

It  is  imagined  as   sovereign  because  the  concept  was born  in  an  age  in  which  Enlightenment  and  Revolution were  destroying  the  legitimacy  of  the  divinely-ordained, hierarchical dynastic realm…

Finally,  it  is  imagined  as  a   community,  because, regardless  of  the  actual  inequality  and  exploitation  that may prevail in each, the nation is always conceived as a deep,  horizontal  comradeship.  Ultimately  it  is  this fraternity  that  makes  it  possible,  over  the  past  two centuries, for so many millions of people, not so much to kill, as willingly die for such limited imaginings. 

—Benedict Anderson

1

Nagano, April 1962

Noa hadn’t meant to linger at the café by the Nagano train station, but it wasn’t as if he knew where to go exactly. He hadn’t made a plan, which was unlike  him,  but  after  he’d  left  Waseda,  his  days  had  made  little  sense  to him. Reiko Tamura, a cheerful middle school teacher who had been kind to him,  was  from  Nagano,  and  for  some  reason,  he’d  always  considered  her hometown  as  a  place  populated  with  gentle,  benevolent  Japanese.  He recalled  his  teacher’s  childhood  stories  of  the  snowstorms  that  were  so severe  that  when  she  walked  outside  her  little  house  to  go  to  school,  she could hardly see the streetlights. Osaka had snow occasionally, but nothing resembling  Tamura-san’s  storms.  He  had  always  wanted  to  visit  his teacher’s hometown—in his mind, it was always blanketed with fresh snow. 

This morning, when the man at the ticket counter had asked him where to, he’d replied, “Nagano, please.” Finally, he was here. He felt safe. Tamura-san  had  also  spoken  of  school  trips  to  the  famed  Zenkoji  temple,  where she’d eat her modest bento outdoors with her classmates. 

Seated  alone  at  a  small  table  not  far  from  the  counter,  Noa  drank  his brown tea and took only a few bites of his omelet rice while considering a visit  to  the  temple.  He  was  raised  as  a  Christian,  but  he  felt  respectful  of Buddhists, especially those who had renounced the spoils of the world. The Lord was supposed to be everywhere, which was what Noa had learned at church, but would God keep away from temples or shrines? Did such places

offend  God,  or  did  He  understand  those  who  may  wish  to  worship something, anything? As always, Noa wished he’d had more time with Isak. 

The thought of him saddened Noa, and the thought of Hansu, his biological father,  shamed  him.  Koh  Hansu  didn’t  believe  in  anything  but  his  own efforts—not God, not Jesus, not Buddha, and not the Emperor. 

The heavyset waiter came by with a teapot. 

“Is  everything  to  your  satisfaction,  sir?”  the  waiter  asked  him  while refilling Noa’s cup. “Is the meal not to your liking? Too much scallion? I always tell the cook that he is too heavy with the—” 

“The  rice  is  very  good,  thank  you,”  Noa  replied,  realizing  that  it  had been  some  time  since  he  had  spoken  to  anyone  at  all.  The  waiter  had  a broad smile, thin, tadpole eyes, and uneven teeth. His ears were large and his lobes thick—physical features Buddhists admired. The waiter stared at Noa, though most Japanese would have looked away out of politeness. 

“Are  you  visiting  for  a  while?”  The  waiter  glanced  at  Noa’s  suitcase, which was set by the empty chair. 

“Hmm?” Noa was surprised by the waiter’s personal question. 

“I  apologize  for  being  so  nosy.  My  mother  always  said  I  would  get  in trouble  because  I  am  far  too  curious.  Forgive  me,  sir,  I  am  just  a  chatty country  boy,”  the  waiter  said,  laughing.  “I  haven’t  seen  you  here  before. 

Please  forgive  the  café  for  being  so  quiet.  Normally  we  have  many  more customers.  Very  interesting  and  respectable  ones.  I  cannot  help  but  have questions when I meet someone new, but I know I should not ask them.” 

“No, no. It’s natural to want to know things. I understand. I am here to visit, and I heard such nice things about Nagano that I thought I would like to live here.” Noa was surprised to hear himself say this. It felt easy to talk to this stranger. It had not occurred to him before to live in Nagano, but why not? Why not for a year at least? He would not return to Tokyo or Osaka—

this much he had resolved. 

“Move here? To live?  Honto? How wonderful. Nagano is a very special place,” the waiter said with pride. “My entire family is from here. We have always been from here. Eighteen generations, and I am the dumbest one in my family. This is my little café, which my mother bought for me to keep me out of trouble!” The waiter laughed. “Everyone calls me Bingo. It is a game from America. I have played it once.” 

“Nobuo  desu,” Noa said, smiling. “Nobuo Ban  desu.” 

  

“Ban-san, Ban-san,” Bingo chirped happily. “I once loved a short girl from Tokyo named Chie Ban, but she did not love me. Of course! Lovely girls do not  love  me.  My  tall  wife  is  not  lovely,  but  she  loves  me  nonetheless!” 

Again, he laughed. “You know, you are smart to wish to settle in Nagano. I have  been  to  Tokyo  only  once,  and  that  was  enough  for  me.  It’s  dirty, expensive, and full of fast—” The waiter stopped himself. “Wait, you’re not from Tokyo, are you?” 

“No. I’m from Kansai.” 

“Ah,  I  love  Kansai.  I  have  been  to  Kyoto  twice,  and  though  it  is  too expensive for a simple man like myself, I am fond of truly delicious udon, and I believe one can eat delicious udon there for a reasonable sum. I prefer the chewy kind of udon.” 

Noa smiled. It was pleasant to listen to him talk. 

“So  what  will  you  do  for  work?”  the  waiter  asked.  “A  man  must  have work. My mother always says this, too.” Bingo clasped his right hand over his mouth, embarrassed at being so forward, but he was unable to keep from talking so much. The stranger seemed so attractive and humble, and Bingo admired quiet people. “Did you have a job you liked in Kansai?” he asked, his sparse eyebrows raised. 

Noa looked down at his barely eaten meal. 

“Well,  I  have  worked  as  a  bookkeeper.  I  can  also  read  and  write  in English.  Perhaps  a  small  business  may  need  a  bookkeeper.  Or  maybe  a trading company may wish to have documents translated—” 

“A  young  man  like  you  could  work  in  lots  of  places.  Let  me  think.” 

Bingo’s round face grew serious. He tapped his small chin with his index finger. “You seem very smart.” 

“I don’t know about that, but that’s kind of you to say.” Noa smiled. 

“Hmm.” The waiter made a face. “Sir, I don’t know if you’re picky, but if you need work right away, the pachinko parlor hires people from out of town. Office jobs are not so common lately.” 

“Pachinko?” Noa tried not to look offended. Did the waiter think he was Korean?  Most  Japanese  never  assumed  he  was  Korean  until  he  told  them his Korean surname, Boku. His identification card from Waseda stated his tsumei name, Nobuo Bando. Noa wasn’t sure why he had dropped the “-do” 

from his surname when he’d introduced himself to Bingo, but now it was too late to change it back. “I don’t know much about pachinko. I have never

—” 

“Oh, I didn’t mean to offend you. They pay very well, I hear. Takano-san, the manager of the best parlor in Nagano, is a great gentleman. Maybe you wouldn’t work in any ordinary pachinko parlor, but Cosmos Pachinko is a grand establishment run by an old family from the area. They change their machines very often! However, they do not hire foreigners.” 

“Eh?” 

“They  do  not  hire  Koreans  or  Chinese,  but  that  will  not  matter  to  you since you are Japanese.” Bingo nodded several times. 

“Soo desu,” Noa agreed. 

“Takano-san  is  always  looking  for  office  workers  who  are  smart.  He pays handsomely. But he cannot hire foreigners.” Bingo nodded again. 

“Yes, yes,” Noa said sympathetically, sounding as if he understood. Long ago,  he  had  learned  how  to  keep  nodding  even  when  he  didn’t  agree, because he noticed that the motion alone kept people talking. 

“Takano-san is a regular customer. He was here just this morning. Every day, he takes his coffee at the window table.” Bingo pointed. “Black coffee and two sugar cubes. Never any milk. This morning, he tells me, ‘Bingo-san, I have a headache that will not go away, because it is so hard to find good workers. The fools here have pumpkins for heads, and seeds are not brains.’”  The  waiter  clasped  his  thick  meaty  fingers  over  his  head  in  a comic imitation of the anguished Takano-san. 

“Hey, why don’t you go over there and tell Takano-san that I sent you,” 

Bingo  said,  smiling.  This  was  the  sort  of  thing  he  loved  to  do  best—help people and make introductions. He had already arranged three marriages for his high school friends. 

Noa nodded and thanked him. Years later, Bingo would tell anyone that he was Ban-san’s first friend in Nagano. 

Takano-san’s business office was located in another building, separate from the  immense  pachinko  parlor,  almost  two  city  blocks  away.  From  the conservative  appearance  of  the  brick  building,  it  would  have  been

impossible  to  know  the  purpose  of  this  office.  Noa  might  have  missed  it altogether  if  Bingo  hadn’t  drawn  a  map  for  him  on  a  sheet  of  notepaper. 

Except for its number, the building had no sign. 

Hideo Takano, the parlor manager, was a sharp-looking Japanese in his late  thirties.  He  wore  a  beautiful  dark  woolen  suit  with  a  striped  purple necktie  and  a  matching  pocket  handkerchief;  each  week,  he  paid  a neighborhood  boy  to  shine  all  his  leather  shoes  to  a  mirror  sheen.  He dressed  so  well  that  he  looked  more  like  a  clothing  salesman  than  a  man who worked in an office. Behind his desk were two black safes, the size of doors.  His  large  office  was  adjacent  to  half  a  dozen  modest-sized  rooms, each  filled  with  office  workers  wearing  white  shirts—mostly  young  men and plain-faced office ladies. Takano had a small bump on the bridge of his handsome nose and round black eyes that sloped downward, and when he spoke, his velvety eyes were expressive and direct. 

“Sit down,” Takano said. “My secretary said you are looking for a clerk position.” 

“My  name  is  Nobuo  Ban   desu.  Bingo-san  from  the  café  said  that  you were looking for workers. I recently arrived from Tokyo, sir.” 

“Ha! Bingo sent you? But I don’t need anyone to pour my coffee here.” 

From behind his large metal desk, Takano leaned forward in his chair. “So, Bingo  is  listening  to  my  sad  troubles  after  all.  I  thought  I  was  mostly listening to his.” 

Noa  smiled.  The  man  seemed  genial  enough;  he  didn’t  seem  like someone who hated Koreans. He was glad to have worn a clean shirt and a tie today; Koh Hansu had mentioned often that a man should look his best each  day.  For  Koreans,  this  was  especially  important:  Look  clean  and  be well groomed. In every situation, even in ones when you have a right to be angry, a Korean must speak soberly and calmly, he’d said. 

“So, friend of Bingo-san, what can you do?” Takano asked. 

Noa sat up straighter. “I’m trained as a bookkeeper and have worked for a landlord in Kansai. I’ve collected rents and kept books for several years before I went to university—” 

“Yeah? University? Really? Which one?” 

“Waseda,” Noa answered, “but I haven’t finished my degree in literature. 

I was there for three years.” 

“Literature?”  Takano  shook  his  head.  “I  don’t  need  an  employee  who

will  be  reading  books  when  he  should  be  working.  I  need  a  bookkeeper who’s smart, neat, and honest. He needs to show up to work each morning when he’s supposed to, not hungover and not dealing with girl problems. I don’t want any losers. I fire losers.” Takano tilted his head after saying all this. Noa looked very respectable; he could see why Bingo would send him over. 

“Yes, sir. Of course. I am a very precise bookkeeper, and I am very good at writing letters, sir.” 

“Modest.” 

Noa did not apologize. “I will do my best if you hire me, sir.” 

“What’s your name again?” 

“Nobuo Ban  desu.” 

“You’re not from here.” 

“No, sir. I’m from Kansai.” 

“Why did you leave school?” 

“My mother died, and I didn’t have enough money to finish my degree. I was hoping to earn money to return to school one day.” 

“And your father?” 

“He is dead.” 

Takano  never  believed  it  when  out-of-towners  said  their  parents  were dead, but he didn’t care either way. 

“So why should I train you so you can leave to continue your study of literature?  I’m  not  interested  in  helping  you  finish  your  university education. I need a bookkeeper who will stick around. Can you do that? I won’t pay you very well when you start, but you’ll be able to get by. What the hell are you going to do with literature, anyway? There’s no money in that. I never finished high school, and I can hire you or fire you a hundred times. Your generation is foolish.” 

Noa didn’t reply. His family thought he wanted to work in a company, but that wasn’t entirely true. It had been a private dream of his to be a high school English teacher. He’d thought that if he graduated from Waseda then it  might  be  possible  to  get  a  good  job  at  a  private  school.  Public  schools didn’t  hire  Koreans,  but  he  thought  the  law  may  be  changed  one  day.  He had  even  considered  becoming  a  Japanese  citizen.  He  knew  he  could  at least work as some sort of private tutor. 

“Well, you don’t have the money for university now, and you need a job, 

or else you wouldn’t be here. So where are you living?” 

“I arrived in Nagano today. I was going to find a boardinghouse.” 

“You can sleep in the dormitory behind the shop. You’ll have to share a room at first. No smoking in the rooms, and you cannot bring girls. You are allowed  three  meals  in  the  cafeteria.  As  much  rice  as  you  want.  There’s meat  twice  a  week.  As  for  girls,  there  are  hotels  for  that  sort  of  thing.  I don’t  care  what  you  do  on  your  time  off,  but  your  first  duty  is  to  the company. I am a very generous manager, but if you mess up, you will be terminated instantly without any back pay.” 

Noa wondered if his younger brother spoke this way to employees. The fact  that  he  was  going  to  work  for  a  pachinko  business,  no  different  than Mozasu, a kid who had flunked out of school essentially, was stunning to Noa. 

“You can start today. Find Ikeda-san in the office next to mine. He has gray hair. Do whatever he tells you. He’s my head accountant. I’ll try you out  for  a  month.  If  you  do  okay,  I’ll  pay  you  a  good  enough  salary.  You have no overhead. You can save quite a bit.” 

“Thank you, sir.” 

“Where are your people from?” 

“Kansai,” Noa replied. 

“Yeah, you said. Where in Kansai?” 

“Kyoto,” Noa replied. 

“What do your parents do?” 

“They’re dead,” Noa replied, hoping to end the questions. 

“Yeah, you said. So what did they do?” 

“My father worked in a udon shop.” 

“Yeah?”  Takano  looked  puzzled.  “So  a  noodle  man  sends  his  son  to Waseda? Really?” 

Noa said nothing, wishing he was a better liar. 

“You’re not a foreigner, right? You swear.” 

Noa tried to look surprised by such a question. “No, sir. I am Japanese.” 

“Good, good,” Takano replied. “Get out of my office and see Ikeda-san.” 

The  dormitory  of  the  pachinko  parlor  slept  sixty  employees.  On  his  first

night,  Noa  slept  in  one  of  the  smallest  rooms,  sharing  it  with  an  older worker  who  snored  like  a  broken  motor.  Within  a  week,  he  established  a routine. When he woke up, Noa washed his face quickly, having bathed the night before in the public bath, and he went down to the cafeteria where the cook served rice, mackerel, and tea. He worked methodically and won over Ikeda-san,  who  had  never  met  such  a  smart  bookkeeper.  When  the  trial month passed, Noa was kept on. Years later, Noa learned that the Japanese owner  had  liked  Noa  from  the  start.  After  the  first  month,  the  owner  told Takano  to  give  Noa  a  raise  and  a  better  room  at  the  year’s  end,  but  not before,  because  the  others  might  fuss  over  any  favoritism.  The  owner suspected  that  Nobuo  Ban  was  a  Korean,  but  he  said  nothing,  because  as long as no one else knew, it didn’t matter. 

2

Osaka, April 1965

In  three  years,  Yumi  had  lost  two  pregnancies,  and  she  found  herself pregnant again. Against the advice of her husband, Mozasu, she’d worked through the previous pregnancies. In her quiet and deliberate way, Yumi’s boss, Totoyama-san, insisted that she work from home for this pregnancy. 

Yumi refused. 

“Yumi-chan,  there  isn’t  much  work  this  season,  and  you  need  to  rest,” 

Totoyama-san would say, and only occasionally, Yumi went home before it got too dark. 

It was a late spring afternoon. Yumi had just completed an order of bow ties for hotel uniforms when she felt sharp pains along her lower abdomen. 

This time, Totoyama-san refused to hear a word of protest from Yumi. She sent  for  Mozasu,  who  picked  up  his  wife,  and  he  took  her  to  a  famous Japanese  baby  doctor  in  downtown  Osaka,  whom  Totoyama-san  had learned of, rather than to Yumi’s regular doctor in Ikaino. 

“It’s elementary, Boku-san. You have very high blood pressure. Women like you often fight pregnancy,” the doctor said calmly. 

He  walked  away  from  the  examination  table  and  returned  to  his  desk. 

His office had been painted recently, and the faint smell of paint lingered. 

Except for a medical chart of a woman’s reproductive organs, everything in

the office was white or stainless steel. 

Yumi said nothing and thought about what he said. Could it be true? she wondered.  Could  she  have  somehow  aborted  her  prior  pregnancies  by fighting them? 

“I am less worried about the previous miscarriages. It is a sad thing, of course, but miscarriages reveal the wisdom of nature. It’s for the best that you  don’t  give  birth  when  it  isn’t  good  for  your  health.  A  miscarriage indicates  that  the  woman  can  conceive,  so  it  is  not  necessarily  a  fertility matter.  But,  as  for  this  pregnancy,  I  do  not  see  much  danger  to  the  child; there is danger only to the mother; so for the remainder of the pregnancy, you must remain in bed.” 

“But I have to work,” Yumi said, looking terrified. 

The doctor shook his head. 

“Yumi-chan,” Mozasu said, “you have to listen to the doctor.” 

“I can work less. Go home early, the way Totoyama-san wants me to.” 

“Boku-san, it’s possible for the mother to die of preeclampsia. As your physician,  I  cannot  allow  you  to  work.  My  patients  must  listen  to  me,  or else we cannot work together.” 

The  famous  doctor  looked  away  from  her,  pretending  to  glance  at  the few  papers  on  his  desk,  confident  that  Yumi  would  remain  his  patient. 

She’d be a fool to choose otherwise. He jotted down some notes about her diet, advising her to avoid sweets or too much rice. She must not gain much weight, since she’d be retaining an enormous amount of water, and the baby would be too big to deliver vaginally. 

“Please call me any time you do not feel comfortable. This is critical. If we have to deliver early, then we need to take precautions. Boku-san, there is no need to be stoic. That can come after you have the child. A woman has a  right  to  be  a  little  difficult  before  she  has  her  first  child.”  The  doctor smiled at both of them. “Make a fuss about your food cravings, or if you want extra pillows at night.” 

Mozasu nodded, grateful for the doctor’s humor and inflexible tone. Any good  doctor  would  need  to  match  his  wife’s  stubbornness.  Mozasu  had never  had  reason  to  disagree  with  Yumi  on  anything  important,  but  he wondered  if  he  had  not  done  so  because  he’d  sensed  that  she  would  not have listened to him anyway. 

When the couple returned home, Yumi lay down on the futon, her dark

hair mussed and spread out across the narrow pillow. Mozasu was seated on the bed, cross-legged by her side, not knowing what else to say to his wife, who did not want a glass of water or anything to eat. With her, he felt a little dumb,  because  she  was  so  stalwart  and  clever.  Her  goals  had  always seemed  absurdly  fantastic.  Sometimes,  he  wondered  how  she  allowed herself to dream for so much. He had never seen her cry or complain about anything  difficult.  He  knew  Yumi  did  not  want  to  be  at  home  by  herself, unable to work or go to her English classes. 

“Would you like your English books?” he asked. 

“No,” she said, not looking at him. “You have to go back to work,  nee? 

I’ll be fine. You can go.” 

“Can’t I get you something? Anything?” 

“Why can’t we go to America? We could have a good life there.” 

“You  remember  what  the  immigration  lawyer  said.  It  would  be impossible almost.” 

“The minister Maryman-san may be able to sponsor us.” 

“Why  would  he  do  that?  I’m  not  going  to  become  a  missionary  and neither are you. You don’t even believe in God. Besides, what could I do in America that would make as much money as I do here? I’m not going back to school. I’m not a college boy; I’m your oaf. I count on you to think for the two of us, and soon, for the three of us.” He laughed, hoping she would smile. 

“Yumi-chan, very soon I will open my own parlor in Yokohama, and if it is successful, I’ll make more money than twenty college graduates. Can you imagine? Then I can buy you anything you want. If it’s not successful, I can still work for Goro-san and make us a nice life.” 

“I know how to make money.” 

“Yes, I know. I know you are independent. But it would give me pleasure to buy something for you that you cannot get for yourself. And I promise you  will  like  Yokohama;  it’s  an  international  city.  There  are  lots  of Americans  there.  As  soon  as  you  have  the  baby,  and  the  doctor  says  it  is okay, I will take you to visit. We can stay in a beautiful hotel, and you can see what it’s like. And it will be easier for you to study English there. We can find you a tutor, and you can go to school if you like,” Mozasu said. 

Although he tried not to think of Noa because it made him too sad, Mozasu could not help but think of his brother, who had quit Waseda and run away

without explanation. 

“The Japanese do not like us. How will our baby live here?” Yumi asked. 

“Some Japanese like us very much. The baby will live here with us. She will  live  like  us.”  From  the  very  first  pregnancy,  Mozasu  had  determined that the baby was a girl—a child just like Yumi. 

Mozasu  stroked  her  forehead.  His  dark  hand  looked  enormous  on  her small, pale brow. For a very young woman, his wife could appear ancient in her sternness, able to push herself through the most difficult tasks, but when sad, she had the face of a disappointed child, lost and bereft. He loved her face, how it showed every trace of feeling; she could be silent, but she was incapable of hiding herself from others. 

“What  else  can  we  do?”  Mozasu  asked,  looking  to  her  for  the  answer. 

“Besides go to America?” He had never understood what she thought she’d find  there.  Sometimes,  he  wondered  if  Noa  had  gone  to  the  States—this magical place so many Koreans in Japan idealized. “What else, Yumi-chan, what else would you like to do?” 

She shrugged. “I don’t want to stay in the house until the baby comes. I don’t like to be lazy.” 

“You will never be lazy. It’s impossible.” He laughed. “When the baby comes, and it will be soon,” he said, “you will be chasing after her. You and she will be the fastest moving females in Osaka—never ever bound by the house.” 

“Mozasu, I can feel her moving. I didn’t lose the baby.” 

“Of  course  not.  The  doctor  said  the  baby  is  fine.  Baby-chan  will  look just  like  you.  We’ll  give  her  a  wonderful  home.  You’re  going  to  be  a wonderful mother.” 

She smiled, not believing him but wanting him to be right. 

“I called my mother. She’ll come here tonight.” 

Yumi crinkled her eyes, worried. 

“You like her,  nee?” 

“Yes,” Yumi said. It was true; Yumi admired her mother-in-law, yet they were strangers to one another. Sunja was not like most mothers of sons; she never said anything intrusive, and her reluctance to speak her mind had only increased  after  Noa  disappeared.  When  Mozasu  and  Yumi  had  asked  her and  Mozasu’s  grandmother  to  move  into  their  house,  Sunja  had  declined, saying  that  it  would  be  better  for  the  young  couple  to  live  without  old

women bothering them. 

“I thought she wanted to stay with her mother and Aunt Kyunghee.” 

“Yes, but she wants to help us. She will come by herself. It will not be permanent.  Grandmother  will  stay  with  Aunt  Kyunghee  to  help  with  the store. I’ll hire some girls for them to replace my mother while she’s here.” 

After two weeks of bed rest, Yumi felt like she was going out of her mind. 

Mozasu had bought her a television, but she had no interest in watching it, and heartburn kept her from reading. Her wrists and ankles were so swollen that if she pushed her thumb lightly onto her wrist, she could make a deep impression in her flesh. Only the baby’s movements and occasional hiccups kept  Yumi  glued  to  her  futon  and  from  fleeing  out  of  doors.  Since  her arrival, her mother-in-law remained by herself in the small room beside the kitchen—no  matter  how  many  times  Mozasu  insisted  that  she  stay  in  the larger, unused room by the master bedroom. Sunja did all the cooking and cleaning.  At  whatever  hour  of  the  night  Mozasu  came  home,  she  had  his dinner ready. 

It was morning when Sunja knocked on Yumi’s door to bring her breakfast. 

“Come in,  omoni,” Yumi said. Her own mother could not make a pot of rice or a cup of tea, in contrast to Mozasu’s mother, who had supported her family on her cooking. 

As usual, Sunja carried in a tray with an assortment of tempting dishes, all covered with a clean white cloth. She smiled at her daughter-in-law. 

Yumi,  who  would  normally  have  relished  such  good  meals,  felt  bad, because all she could manage to keep down lately was rice porridge. 

“I feel terrible that I’m lying in bed all day while you work so much,” 

Yumi said, hoping that Sunja would stay and talk with her. “Have you eaten breakfast?” 

“Yes, I ate. You work hard all the time. But now, you’re supposed to be resting. A pregnancy is not an easy thing. My mother had six miscarriages before having me,” she said. “She wanted to come and take care of you, but I told her to stay at home.” 

“Six miscarriages. I’ve only had two.” 

“Two is not easy, either,” Sunja said. “You should have your breakfast. 

You and the baby need nourishment.” 

Yumi sat up a bit. “Mozasu left early today for Yokohama.” 

Sunja  nodded.  She’d  fixed  his  breakfast  before  he  got  on  the  morning train. 

“You saw him then.” Yumi admired the tray. “This looks delicious.” 

Sunja  hoped  her  daughter-in-law  would  eat.  She  was  terrified  that  she would  miscarry  again,  but  didn’t  want  to  appear  worried.  She  regretted having mentioned the number of her mother’s miscarriages. The minister at the church had warned against the sins of the careless tongue; it was always better to speak less, Sunja thought. 

“Thank you for taking such good care of us.” 

Sunja shook her head. 

“This is nothing. You’ll do this for your children,” Sunja said. 

Unlike  the   ajumma s  in  the  open  market  with  their  tight,  black, permanent-wave curls, Sunja hadn’t colored her graying hair and wore it cut short like a man’s. Her mature figure was solid, neither small nor large. She had  worked  out  of  doors  for  so  many  years  that  the  sun  had  carved  thin grooves  into  her  round,  dark  face.  Like  a  Buddhist  nun,  Sunja  wore  no makeup, not even moisturizer. It was as if she had decided some time ago that she would not care what she looked like beyond being clean, as if to pay penance for having once cared about such things, when in fact she had not. 

“Did Mozasu tell you about my mother?” Yumi picked up the spoon. 

“That she worked in a bar,” Sunja said. 

“She was a prostitute. My father was her pimp. They weren’t married.” 

Sunja nodded and stared at the tray of uneaten food. When Mozasu had told her about Yumi’s family, Sunja had imagined as much. The occupation and the war had been difficult for everyone. 

“I’m sure she was a good person. I’m sure she cared for you very much.” 

Sunja believed this. She had loved Hansu, and then she had loved Isak. 

However, what she felt for her boys, Noa and Mozasu, was more than the love she’d felt for the men; this love for her children felt like life and death. 

After Noa had gone, she felt half-dead. She could not imagine any mother feeling differently. 

“My  mother  isn’t  a  good  person.  She  beat  us.  She  cared  more  about drinking and getting money than anything else. After my brother died, if my sister and I hadn’t run away, she would have put us to work. Doing what she did. Not once did she ever say a kind thing to me,” Yumi said. She’d never told anyone this. 

“Mozasu told me your sister passed away.” 

Yumi  nodded.  After  she  and  her  sister  had  left  home,  they’d  found shelter in an abandoned clothing factory. In the winter, they both got sick with a high fever, but her sister had died in her sleep. Yumi had slept beside her sister’s dead body for nearly a day, waiting to die herself. 

Sunja shifted her seat and moved toward her. 

“My child, you have suffered too much.” 

Yumi did not deliver a girl. Her baby Solomon was an enormous boy, over nine  pounds,  even  larger  than  the  famous  doctor  had  expected.  The  birth took over thirty hours, and the doctor had to call in a colleague to help him through the night. The baby was strong and well. In a month’s time, Yumi recovered  fully  and  returned  to  work,  bringing  Solomon  with  her  to  the workshop. On his first birthday ceremony, Solomon clutched the crisp yen note over the ink brush, string, or cakes—signifying that he would have a rich life. 

3

Yokohama, November 1968

When the floor manager came by to tell Mozasu that the police were waiting in his office to see him, he assumed that it was about the pachinko machine permits. It was that time of the year. Once he reached his office, he recognized the young men from the precinct and invited them to sit down, but they remained standing and bowed, not saying a word at first. The floor manager,  who  remained  by  the  door,  was  unable  to  meet  his  glance; preoccupied  earlier,  Mozasu  hadn’t  noticed  that  the  floor  manager’s  face was so solemn. 

“Sir,” the shorter of the two officers said, “your family is in the hospital at the moment, and we’ve come to take you there. The captain would have come himself, but—” 

“What?” Mozasu left his side of the desk and went to the door. 

“Your wife and son were hit by a taxi this morning. A block from your son’s school. The driver was inebriated from the night before and had fallen asleep while driving.” 

“Are they all right?” 

“Your son broke his ankle. Otherwise, he is well.” 

“And my wife?” 

“She died in the ambulance before reaching the hospital.” 

Mozasu ran out of the office without his coat. 

  

The funeral was held in Osaka, and Mozasu would always be able to recall some parts of it vividly and some not at all. During the service, he had held on  to  Solomon’s  small  hand,  fearing  that  if  he  let  go,  the  boy  might disappear. The three-and-a-half-year-old boy stood, leaning on his crutches, insisting  on  greeting  each  person  who’d  come  to  pay  his  respects  to  his mama. After an hour, he agreed to sit down but did not leave his father’s side.  Several  witnesses  had  recounted  that  Yumi  had  pushed  her  son  onto the sidewalk when the taxi lost control. At the funeral, Mozasu’s childhood friend Haruki Totoyama had observed that Yumi must have had incredible hand-eye control in a moment of such intense pressure. 

Several hundred guests came. They were people Mozasu knew from his business and many more from his father’s church, where his grandmother and Aunt Kyunghee still worshipped. Mozasu did his best to greet them, but he  could  hardly  speak;  it  was  as  if  he  had  forgotten  both  Korean  and Japanese.  He  didn’t  want  to  go  on  anymore  without  Yumi,  but  this  was something he could not say. She was his lover, but more than anything, she was his wise friend. He could never replace her. And he felt he had done her a great injustice by not having told her this. He had expected to have a long life  with  her,  not  a  few  years.  Who  would  he  tell  when  a  customer  did something funny? Who would he tell that their son had made him so proud, standing on crutches and shaking the hands of grown-ups and being braver than any other person in the room? When the mourners wept at the sight of the little boy in the black suit, Solomon would say, “Don’t cry.” He calmed one  hysterical  woman  by  telling  her,  “Mama  is  in  California.”  When  the mourner looked puzzled, neither Solomon nor Mozasu explained what this meant. 

He had never taken her there. They’d meant to go. With some difficulty, it was possible now for them to get the passports, but he hadn’t bothered. 

Most Koreans in Japan couldn’t travel. If you wanted a Japanese passport, which  would  allow  you  to  reenter  without  hassles,  you  had  to  become  a Japanese citizen—which was almost impossible, and no one he knew would do that anyway. Otherwise, if you wanted to travel, you could get a South Korean passport through  Mindan, but few wanted to be affiliated with the Republic  of  Korea,  either,  since  the  impoverished  country  was  run  by  a

dictator.  The  Koreans  who  were  affiliated  with  North  Korea  couldn’t  go anywhere,  though  some  were  allowed  to  travel  to  North  Korea.  Although nearly  everyone  who  had  returned  to  the  North  was  suffering,  there  were still  far  more  Koreans  in  Japan  whose  citizenship  was  affiliated  with  the North  than  the  South.  At  least  the  North  Korean  government  still  sent money for schools for them, everyone said. Nevertheless, Mozasu wouldn’t leave  the  country  where  he  was  born.  Where  would  he  go,  anyway?  So Japan didn’t want them, so fucking what? 

Images of her filled his mind, and even as the mourners spoke to him, all he could hear was her practicing English phrases from her language books. 

No matter how many times Mozasu had said he would not emigrate to the United States, Yumi had not given up hope that one day they would live in California. Lately, she had been suggesting New York. 

“Mozasu,  don’t  you  think  it  would  be  wonderful  to  live  in  New  York City or San Francisco?” she’d ask him occasionally, and it was his job to say that he couldn’t decide between the two coasts. 

“There, no one would care that we are not Japanese,” she’d say.  Hello, my name is Yumi Baek. This is my son, Solomon. He is three years old. How are  you?   Once,  when  Solomon  asked  her  what  California  was,  she  had replied, “Heaven.” 

After most of the funeral guests left, Mozasu and Solomon sat down at the  back  of  the  funeral  hall.  Mozasu  patted  the  boy’s  back,  and  his  son leaned into him, fitting into the crook of his father’s right arm. 

“You’re a good son,” Mozasu said to him in Japanese. 

“You are a good papa.” 

“Do you want to get something to eat?” 

Solomon shook his head and looked up when an older man approached them. 

“Mozasu, are you okay?” the man asked him in Korean. He was a virile-looking  gentleman  in  his  late  sixties  or  early  seventies,  wearing  an expensive black suit with narrow lapels and a dark necktie. 

The  face  was  familiar,  but  Mozasu  couldn’t  place  it.  He  felt  unable  to answer him. Not wanting to be rude, Mozasu smiled, but he wanted to be left  alone.  Perhaps  it  was  a  customer  or  a  bank  officer;  Mozasu  couldn’t think right now. 

“It’s me. Koh Hansu. Have I aged that much?” Hansu smiled. “Your face

is the same, of course, but you’ve become a man. And this is your boy?” 

Hansu touched Solomon’s head. Throughout the day, nearly everyone had patted the boy’s glossy chestnut-colored hair. 

Mozasu shot up from his seat. 

“Uh-muh. Of course, I know who you are. It’s been so long. Mother had been looking for you for a while but couldn’t get ahold of you. To see if you might know where Noa is. He’s disappeared.” 

“It’s  been  too  long.”  Hansu  shook  his  hand.  “Have  you  heard  from Noa?” 

“Well,  yes  and  no.  He  sends  Mother  money  each  month,  but  he  won’t give his whereabouts. He sends a lot of money actually, so he can’t be too badly off. I just wish we knew where he—” 

Hansu  nodded.  “He  sent  me  money,  too.  To  pay  me  back,  he  said.  I wanted to return it, but there’s no way. I thought I’d give it to your mother for her to keep for him.” 

“Are you still in Osaka?” Mozasu asked. 

“No, no. I live in Tokyo now. I live near my daughters.” 

Mozasu nodded. He felt weak suddenly and wanted to sit again. When Hansu’s driver appeared, Hansu promised to call on Mozasu another day. 

“Sir, I am very sorry to bother you, but there is a small matter outside. The young woman said it was an emergency.” 

Hansu nodded and walked out of the building with his driver. 

As he approached the car, Hansu’s new girl, Noriko, beckoned him from within. 

The  long-haired  beauty  clapped  when  she  saw  him  open  the  door.  Her pink pearl nail polish glinted from her fingertips. 

“Uncle is here!” she cried happily. 

“What’s the matter?” Hansu asked. “I was busy.” 

“Nothing. I was bored, and I missed my uncle,” she replied. “Take me shopping, please. I have waited for so long and so patiently for you to come back in this car. And the driver is no fun! My friends in Ginza told me cute bags from France came in this week!” 

Hansu  closed  the  car  door.  The  bulletproof  windows  shut  out  all

daylight.  The  interior  lamps  of  the  Mercedes  sedan  lit  up  Noriko’s  oval-shaped face. 

“You called me in here because you wanted to go shopping,  nee?” 

“Yes,  Uncle,”  she  said  sweetly,  and  extended  her  pretty  small  hand  on his lap like a kitten’s paw. Her rich clients loved her petulant-niece routine. 

Men wanted to buy girls nice things. If Uncle wanted to remove her white cotton panties, he’d have to buy her as many luxury items from France as she  wanted  for  months  and  months.  Koh  Hansu  was  the  most  important patron  of  the  hostess  bar  where  Noriko  worked;  Noriko’s  mama-san  had promised  her  that  Koh  Hansu  liked  spoiling  his  new  girls.  This  was  their second  lunch  date,  and  on  their  first,  he  had  bought  her  a  Christian  Dior purse before lunch. Noriko, an eighteen-year-old former beauty contestant, was  not  used  to  being  kept  waiting  in  a  car.  She  had  worn  her  most expensive peach-colored georgette silk dress with matching heels and a real pearl necklace, borrowed from mama-san. 

“Did you ever go to high school?” he asked. 

“No, Uncle. I’m not a good schoolgirl,” she said, smiling. 

“No, of course not. You are stupid. I can’t stand stupid.” 

Hansu hit the girl’s face so hard that blood gushed from her pink mouth. 

“Uncle, Uncle!” she cried. She swatted at his thick, clenched fist. 

He hit her again and again, banging her head against the side lamp of the car  until  she  stopped  making  any  noise.  Blood  covered  her  face  and  the front  of  her  peach-colored  dress.  The  necklace  was  splattered  with  red spots. The driver sat motionless in the front until Hansu was finished. 

“Take  me  to  the  office,  then  take  her  back  to  her  mama-san.  Tell  the mama-san  that  I  don’t  care  how  pretty  a  girl  is,  I  cannot  bear  a  girl  who does not have any sense. I was at a funeral. I will not return to the bar until this ignorant thing is removed from my sight.” 

“I’m sorry, sir. She said it was an emergency. That she had to speak to you or else she would start to scream. I didn’t know what to do.” 

“No  hooker  is  ever  to  be  given  precedence  over  a  funeral.  If  she  was sick, then you should have taken her to hospital. Otherwise, she could have screamed her head off. What does it matter, you oaf?” 

The girl was still alive. She sat crumpled and half-awake in the corner of the expansive backseat like a crushed butterfly. 

The driver was terrified, because he could still be punished. He should

never have listened to some bar girl and her stories. A lieutenant he knew in the  organization  had  lost  part  of  his  ring  finger  for  failing  to  line  up  the guests’ shoes properly outside Koh Hansu’s apartment when he was much younger and training through the ranks. 

“I am sorry, sir. I am very sorry. Please forgive me, sir.” 

“Shut up. Go to the office.” Hansu closed his eyes and leaned his head against the leather-covered rest. 

After the driver dropped Hansu off, he took Noriko to the bar where she worked. The horrified mama-san took her to the hospital, and even after the surgeons did their work, the girl’s nose would never look the same again. 

Noriko  was  ruined.  The  mama-san  couldn’t  recover  her  expenses  so  she sent Noriko off to a  toruko where she would have to bathe and serve men in the nude until she was too old to work that job. Her tits and ass would last half  a  dozen  years  at  most  in  the  hot  water.  Then  she  would  have  to  find something else to do. 

Six  days  a  week,  Sunja  took  her  grandson  to  school  and  picked  him  up. 

Solomon  attended  an  international  preschool  where  only  English  was spoken. At school, he spoke English and at home, Japanese. Sunja spoke to him in Korean, and he answered in Japanese sprinkled with a few words in Korean. Solomon loved going to school, and Mozasu thought it was good to keep  him  occupied.  He  was  a  cheerful  child  who  wanted  to  please  his teachers  and  elders.  Wherever  he  went,  the  news  of  his  mother’s  death preceded him, wrapping the child in a kind of protective cloud; teachers and mothers  of  his  friends  were  watchful  on  his  behalf.  Solomon  was  certain that he would see his mama in heaven; he believed that she could see him. 

She visited him in his dreams, he said, and told him that she missed holding him. 

In the evenings, grandmother, father, and son ate dinner together even if Mozasu had to return to work immediately after his meal. Twice, Mozasu’s friend  Haruki  Totoyama  had  come  from  Osaka  to  visit,  and  once,  they’d gone to Osaka to see the family, since Uncle Yoseb was too frail to travel. 

Another  school  day  almost  over,  Sunja  waited  patiently  outside  the preschool  alongside  the  sweet-natured  Filipina  nannies  and  the  friendly

Western  mothers  who  were  also  waiting  to  collect  their  children.  Sunja couldn’t  speak  to  them,  but  she  smiled  and  nodded  in  their  presence.  As usual, Solomon was one of the first to run out. He shouted good-bye to his teachers, then bolted outside to hug his grandmother’s torso before joining the other boys to race to the corner candy store. Sunja tried to keep up with his  pace.  She  was  oblivious  to  Hansu,  who’d  been  watching  her  from  his car. 

Sunja was wearing a black wool coat, nothing expensive but not shabby, either.  It  looked  store-bought.  She  had  aged  considerably,  and  Hansu  felt sorry for her. Only a little over fifty, she looked much older than that. As a girl,  she  had  been  bright  and  taut,  so  very  appealing.  The  memory  of  her fullness  and  vitality  aroused  him.  The  years  in  the  sun  had  darkened  her face  and  covered  her  hands  lightly  with  pale  brown  spots.  Shallow  crags had settled in her once-smooth brow. In place of the maiden’s dark, glossy braids, she now kept her hair short, and it was gray mostly. Her middle had thickened.  Hansu  remembered  her  large  breasts  and  lovely  pink  nipples. 

They  had  never  spent  more  than  a  few  hours  together,  and  it  had  always been a wish of his to make love to her more than once in the course of a day.  He’d  had  many  women  and  girls,  yet  her  innocence  and  trust  had excited him more than even the sexiest of whores who were willing to do anything. 

Her pretty eyes were still the same—bright and hard like river stones—

the  light  shimmered  in  them.  He  had  loved  her  passionately,  the  way  an older man could love a young girl who could restore his youth and vigor; he had loved her with a kind of gratitude. He knew that he’d loved her more than any other girl. She was not beautiful anymore, but he desired her still. 

The recollection of taking her in the forest often made him hard, and if he had  been  alone  in  the  car,  he  would  have  jerked  off,  happy  for  the  rare erection. 

Several times each day, Hansu thought of her. What was she doing at the moment? Was she all right? Did she think of him? His mind turned to her as often  as  it  did  toward  his  dead  father.  When  Hansu  learned  that  she  was looking for him to find out where Noa was, he did not contact her, because he  had  no  news.  He  could  not  imagine  disappointing  Sunja.  He  had  used every  resource  to  locate  the  boy  but  to  no  avail.  Noa  had  disappeared  so perfectly  that  if  Hansu  hadn’t  had  the  mortuary  logs  inspected  regularly

throughout  Japan,  he  might  have  thought  that  the  boy  was  dead.  At  the funeral, he learned that Noa still sent his mother money. That was a relief. 

The  boy  was  alive,  then,  and  living  somewhere  in  Japan.  It  had  been Hansu’s plan to find Noa first, then to contact Sunja, but Yumi’s funeral had reminded him that time was not always in his favor. Then last month, his doctor had diagnosed him with prostate cancer. 

As Sunja walked past his car, Hansu rolled down the car window. 

“Sunja, Sunja.” 

She gasped. 

Hansu told his driver to stay and opened the car door himself to get out. 

“Listen,  I  got  to  Yumi’s  funeral  late.  Mozasu  said  you’d  left.  You  live with him now, right?” 

Sunja stood on the pavement and stared at him. He didn’t seem to age. 

Had it really been eleven years since she last saw him? It had been at his office with Noa, then that expensive dinner to celebrate Noa’s admission to Waseda. Noa had been gone six years now. Sunja glanced in the direction of her  grandson,  who’d  run  into  the  store  with  the  other  boys  to  look  over comics and debate over which candies to purchase. Without replying, Sunja walked  in  Solomon’s  direction.  Mozasu  had  mentioned  that  Hansu  had come to the funeral, that when asked about Noa, Hansu had said nothing. 

“Can’t  you  stop  for  a  moment  to  speak  with  me?  The  little  boy’s  fine. 

He’s in the shop. You can see him through the glass.” Solomon was in the cluster of boys standing by the rotating comic-book kiosk. 

“I begged your wife to tell you that I was looking for you. The gardening boy. I’m sure he gave you my message even if she didn’t. Since I’ve known you, I’ve done everything I could to never be a burden to you; I have asked you for nothing. Six years have passed since I went to your house. Six.” 

Hansu opened his mouth, but Sunja spoke again. 

“Do you know where he is?” 

“No.” 

Sunja walked toward the candy store. 

Hansu touched her arm, and Sunja pushed him back hard with the palm of  her  hand,  knocking  him  back  a  step.  The  chauffeur  and  bodyguard, who’d been standing near the car, ran toward him, but he waved them away. 

“I’m fine,” he mouthed to them. 

“Go back to your car,” she said. “Go back to your crooked life.” 

“Sunja—” 

“Why  do  you  bother  me  now?  How  can  you  not  see  that  you’ve destroyed me? Why can’t you let me alone? Noa is gone from me. There is nothing between us.” 

Her wet, shining eyes blinked, lit up like lanterns. Her young face shone through the old one. 

“Can I drive you and Solomon home? Maybe we can go to a café? I need to speak to you.” 

Sunja  looked  down  at  the  large  squares  of  concrete  below  her  feet, unable to stop the flow of tears. 

“I want my son. What did you do to him?” 

“How can you blame me for that? I just wanted to send him to school.” 

Sunja  sobbed.  “It’s  my  fault  that  I  let  you  know  him.  You’re  a  selfish person who’d take whatever you want, no matter the consequences. I wish I’d never met you.” 

Passersby gaped until Hansu stared back at them, forcing them to look away. The boy was still in the shop. 

“You’re the worst kind of man, because you won’t let go until you get your way.” 

“Sunja, I’m dying.” 

4

Cradling  his  copies  of   Tetsuwan  Atomu  and   Ultraman,  Solomon  sat quietly between Sunja and Hansu in the backseat of the large sedan. 

“How old are you?” Hansu asked. 

Solomon held up three fingers. 

“Soo nee. Are you going to read those now?” Hansu asked, pointing to the boy’s new comics. “Can you read already?” 

Solomon shook his head. “I’m going to wait until Toto comes tonight so he can read them to me.” He opened up his red satchel and put the comics inside. 

“Who is Toto?” Hansu asked. 

“He’s my papa’s friend from when they were boys. He’s a real Japanese policeman. He’s caught murderers and robbers. I’ve known him since I was born.” 

“Is that so? All that time?” Hansu smiled. 

The small boy nodded gravely. 

“Grandma, what will you make Toto for dinner?” Solomon asked. 

“Fish   jeon  and  chicken   jorim,”  Sunja  replied.  Mozasu’s  friend  Haruki Totoyama  would  arrive  this  evening  and  stay  for  the  weekend,  and  she’d already planned all the meals. 

“But Toto likes  bulgogi. It’s his favorite meal.” 

“I  can  make  that  tomorrow  night.  He  won’t  leave  until  Sunday afternoon.” 

Solomon looked worried. 

Hansu,  who’d  been  observing  Solomon  carefully,  said,  “I  love  chicken jorim. That’s the kind of dish you can only get at a nice home. Anyone can have  bulgogi at a restaurant, but only your grandmother can make—” 

“Do you want to meet Toto? He’s my best grown-up friend.” 

Sunja shook her head, but Hansu ignored her. 

“I’ve known your father since he was a boy your age. I’d love to have dinner at your house. Thank you, Solomon.” 

In  the  front  hall,  Sunja  removed  her  coat  and  helped  Solomon  with  his. 

With his right forearm raised and his left tucked close to his body, the boy ran  to  the  den  to  watch   Tetsuwan  Atomu.  Hansu  followed  Sunja  to  the kitchen. 

She poured shrimp chips into a small basket and retrieved a yogurt drink from the refrigerator and arranged them on the round Ultraman tray. 

“Solomon,” she called out. 

The boy came to the kitchen to take the tray, and he carried it carefully back to the den to watch his programs. 

Hansu sat down by the Western-style breakfast table. 

“This is a good house.” 

Sunja didn’t reply. 

It  was  a  brand-new  three-bedroom  in  the  Westerners’  section  of Yokohama.  Of  course,  Hansu  had  driven  past  it  before;  he’d  seen  the exterior  of  every  place  she’d  ever  lived.  With  the  exception  of  the farmhouse  during  the  war,  this  was  the  first  one  he’d  been  inside.  The furnishings  resembled  sets  from  American  films—upholstered  sofas,  high wooden  dining  tables,  crystal  chandeliers,  and  leather  armchairs.  Hansu guessed that the family slept on beds rather than on the floor or on futons. 

There were no old things in the house—no traces of anything from Korea or Japan. The spacious, windowed kitchen looked out onto the neighbors’ rock garden. 

Sunja wasn’t speaking to him, but she didn’t seem angry, either. She was facing  the  stove  with  her  back  turned  to  him.  Hansu  could  make  out  the outline  of  her  body  in  her  camel-colored  sweater  and  brown  woolen trousers. The first time he’d spotted her, he’d noticed her large, full bosom beneath the traditional Korean blouse. He’d always preferred a girl with big breasts  and  a  pillowy  bottom.  He  had  never  seen  her  completely  naked; they’d  only  made  love  outside,  where  she  had  always  worn  a   chima. His

famously  beautiful  wife  had  no  chest,  hips,  or  ass,  and  he  had  dreaded fucking  her  because  she’d  loathed  being  touched.  Before  bed,  he  had  to bathe, and after lovemaking she had to have a long bath at no matter what hour. After she gave birth to three girls, he quit trying for a son; even his father-in-law, whom Hansu loved, had said nothing about the other women. 

He believed that she’d been foolish for refusing to be his wife in Korea. 

What did it matter that he had a marriage in Japan? He would have taken excellent  care  of  her  and  Noa.  They  would  have  had  other  children.  She would never have had to work in an open market or in a restaurant kitchen. 

Nevertheless,  he  had  to  admire  her  for  not  taking  his  money  the  way  any young girl did these days. In Tokyo, it was possible for a man to buy a girl for a bottle of French perfume or a pair of shoes from Italy. 

If  Hansu  was  comfortable  reminiscing  in  her  kitchen,  Sunja  was  more than a little unsettled at the sight of him sitting at the breakfast table. From the moment she’d met him, she’d felt his presence all around her. He was an unwanted constant in her imagination. And after Noa vanished, it was as if she were continually haunted by both father and son. Hansu was now in her kitchen waiting patiently for her attention. He was staying for dinner. In all  these  years,  they  had  never  eaten  a  meal  together.  Why  had  he  come? 

When  would  he  go?  It  was  his  way  to  appear  then  disappear,  and  as  she boiled water for their tea, she thought, I could turn around and he could be gone. Then what? 

Sunja  opened  a  blue  tin  of  imported  butter  cookies  and  put  some  on  a plate. She filled the teapot with hot water and floated a generous pinch of tea leaves. It was easy to recall a time when there was no money for tea and a time when there was none to buy. 

“On the first of each month, Noa sends me cash with a brief note saying that he’s well. The postmarks are always different,” she said. 

“I’ve looked for Noa. He doesn’t want to be found. I’m looking for him still. Sunja, he’s my son, too.” 

 How can you blame me for that?  Hansu had once said to her. She poured him a cup of tea and excused herself. 

The reflection in the bathroom mirror disappointed her. She was fifty-two

years old. Her sister-in-law, Kyunghee, who’d been diligent about wearing her hat and gloves to protect her from spots and lines, looked much younger than she did, though Kyunghee was fourteen years older. Sunja touched her short, graying hair. She had never been lovely, and certainly now, she didn’t believe that any man would ever want her. That part of her life had ended with  Mozasu’s  father.  She  was  plain  and  wrinkled;  her  waist  and  thighs were  thick.  Her  face  and  hands  belonged  to  a  poor,  hardworking  woman, and no matter how much money she had in her purse now, nothing would make her appealing. A long time ago, she had wanted Hansu more than her own life. Even when she broke with him, she had wanted him to return, to find her, to keep her. 

Hansu  was  seventy,  yet  he  had  changed  very  little;  if  anything,  his features had improved. He still trimmed his thick white hair carefully and tamed it with scented oil; in his fine wool suit and handmade shoes, Hansu looked like an elegant statesman—a handsome grandfather. No one would have  pegged  him  for  a  yakuza  boss.  Sunja  didn’t  want  to  leave  the bathroom. Before she’d left the house, she hadn’t even bothered to look in the  mirror.  She  wasn’t  hideous  or  shameful  to  look  at,  but  she  had prematurely reached the stage in a woman’s life when no one noticed her entering or leaving a room. 

Sunja  opened  the  cold-water  spigot  and  washed  her  face.  Despite everything,  she  wanted  him  to  desire  her  a  little—this  knowledge  was embarrassing.  In  her  life,  there  had  been  two  men;  that  was  better  than none,  she  supposed;  so  that  had  to  be  enough.  Sunja  dried  her  face  on  a hand towel and turned off the light. 

In the kitchen, Hansu was eating a biscuit. 

“Are you okay living here?” 

She nodded. 

“And the little boy. He’s well behaved.” 

“Mozasu checks in on him all the time.” 

“When will he be home?” 

“Soon. I better make dinner.” 

“Can I help you cook?” Hansu pretended to take off his suit jacket. 

Sunja laughed. 

“At last. I thought you’d forgotten how to smile.” 

They both looked away. 

“Are you dying?” she asked. 

“It’s prostate cancer. I have very good doctors. I don’t think I’ll die of this. Not very soon, anyway.” 

“You lied then.” 

“No, Sunja. We’re all dying.” 

She  felt  angry  with  him  for  lying,  but  she  felt  grateful,  too.  She  had loved him, and she could not bear the thought of him being gone from this life. 

Solomon shrieked with happiness when the door opened. Rolling up his red sweater  sleeves  hastily,  Solomon  raised  his  left  arm,  bent  into  a  sharp  L, and his right hand bisected his left forearm to make an off-centered cross. 

The child made static sounds to announce the laser beams emitting from his left hand and held his fierce pose. 

Haruki fell down onto the floor. He moaned, then made the sound of an explosion. 

“Ah, the  kaiju has been defeated!” Solomon shouted, and jumped on top of Haruki. 

“It’s  very  good  to  see  you  again,”  Mozasu  said  to  Hansu.  “This  is  my friend Haruki Totoyama.” 

“Hajimemashite. Totoyama  desu.” 

Solomon resumed his pose. 

“Have  mercy,  Ultraman.  Kaiju  Toto  must  say  hello  to  your grandmother.” 

“It’s good to see you,” Sunja said. 

“Thank you for having me.” 

Solomon moved in between Sunja and Haruki. 

“Kaiju Toto!” 

“Hai!” Haruki bellowed. 

“Papa bought me a new  Ultraman yesterday.” 

“Lucky, lucky,” Haruki said, sounding envious. 

“I’ll show you. C’mon!” Solomon pulled on Haruki, and the grown man hurtled dramatically toward Solomon’s room. 

Hansu  kept  a  file  on  every  person  in  Sunja’s  life.  He  knew  all  about Detective  Haruki  Totoyama,  the  elder  son  of  a  seamstress  who  owned  a uniform  manufacturer  in  Osaka.  He  had  no  father  and  a  younger  brother who was mentally disabled. Haruki was a homosexual who was engaged to an older woman who worked for his mother. In spite of his relative youth, Haruki was highly regarded in his precinct. 

The dinner table talk was happy and relaxed. 

“Why can’t you move to Yokohama and live with us?” Solomon asked Haruki. 

“Hmm. Tempting,  nee? Then I can play Ultraman every day.  Soooo. But, Soro-chan,  my  mother  and  brother  live  in  Osaka.  I  think  I’m  supposed  to live there, too.” 

“Oh,” Solomon sighed. “I didn’t know you had a brother. Is he older or younger?” 

“Younger.” 

“I’d like to meet him,” Solomon said. “We could be friends.” 

“Soo nee, but he’s very shy.” 

Solomon nodded. 

“Grandma is shy, too.” 

Sunja shook her head, and Mozasu smiled. 

“I wish you could move here with your brother,” Solomon said quietly. 

Haruki  nodded.  Before  Solomon  was  born,  he  had  not  been  very interested in children. From a young age, having a handicapped brother had made him wary of the responsibilities of caring for another person. 

“My girlfriend Ayame prefers Tokyo over Osaka. Perhaps she would be happier here, too,” Haruki said. 

“Maybe you can move here when you get married,” Solomon said. 

Mozasu laughed. “Soo nee.” 

Hansu sat up straighter. 

“The Yokohama chief of police is a friend. Please let me know if I can be of service if you’d like to transfer,” Hansu said, making an offer he could realize.  He  took  out  his  business  card  and  handed  it  to  the  young  officer, and Haruki received it with two hands and a small bow of the head. 

Mozasu raised his eyebrows. 

Sunja, who had been quiet, continued to observe Hansu. Naturally, she was suspicious of his help. Hansu was not an ordinary person, and he was capable of actions she could neither see nor understand. 

5

Nagano, January 1969

A maze of filing cabinets and metal desks created a warren of office workers  in  the  business  offices  of  Cosmos  Pachinko.  In  the  thicket  of furniture, Risa Iwamura, the head filing clerk, was not very noticeable. By any  conventional  measure,  Risa  was,  in  fact,  appealing  in  her  face  and form. However, she possessed a distant manner, preventing ease or intimacy with those around her. It was as if the young woman were turning down her lights  to  minimize  any  possibility  of  attraction  or  notice.  She  dressed soberly  in  white  blouses  and  inexpensive  black  poly  skirts  requiring  little maintenance;  she  wore  the  black  leather  shoes  of  an  old  woman.  In  the winter, one of her two gray wool cardigans graced her thin shoulders like a cape—her only ornament, an inexpensive silvertone wristwatch, which she consulted  often,  though  she  never  seemed  to  have  anywhere  to  go.  When she  performed  her  tasks,  Risa  needed  little  guidance;  she  anticipated  the needs  of  her  employers  faultlessly  and  executed  the  tasks  without  any reminders. 

For  nearly  seven  years,  Noa  had  been  living  in  Nagano,  passing  as  a Japanese  called  Nobuo  Ban.  He  had  worked  assiduously  for  the  owner  of Cosmos  Pachinko  and  had  settled  into  a  small,  invisible  life.  He  was  a valued  employee,  and  the  owner  left  him  alone.  The  only  thing  that  the owner  brought  up  every  January  when  he  gave  Noa  his  bonus  and  New Year’s lecture was marriage: A man of his age and position should have his

own home and children. Noa had been the head of the business offices ever since Takano, the man who had hired him, had moved to Nagoya to run the multiple  Cosmos  businesses  there.  Nevertheless,  Noa  continued  to  live  in the pachinko parlor dorms and took his meals regularly in the pachinko staff cafeteria. Although he had already paid Hansu back for the Waseda tuition and board, Noa still sent money to his mother each month. He spent almost nothing on himself beyond what was absolutely necessary. 

After  this  year’s  New  Year’s  lecture,  Noa  thought  deeply  about  his boss’s advice. He had been aware of Risa. Although she never spoke of it, everyone  knew  that  she  came  from  a  middle-class  family  with  a  sad scandal. 

When Risa was fourteen or so, her father, a beloved doctor at the local clinic,  had  dispensed  improper  medication  to  two  patients  during  the  flu season, resulting in their deaths. Shortly thereafter, the doctor took his own life,  rendering  his  family  both  destitute  and  tainted.  Risa  was  effectively unmarriageable, since a suicide in a family could indicate mental illness in her blood; even worse, her father was perceived to have done something so shameful that he felt that he needed to die. The relatives did not come to the funeral,  and  they  no  longer  called  on  Risa  and  her  mother.  Risa’s  mother never  recovered  from  the  shock  and  no  longer  left  the  house  even  to  run errands.  After  Risa  completed  secondary  school,  Takano,  a  former  patient of Risa’s father, hired her to do clerical work. 

Noa  had  noticed  her  beautiful  handwriting  on  the  files  even  before  he noticed her. It was possible that he was in love with the way she wrote the number two—her parallel lines expressing a kind of free movement inside the invisible box that contained the ideograph’s strokes. If Risa wrote even an ordinary description on an invoice, Noa would pause to read it again, not because of what it said, but because he could detect that there was a kind of dancing spirit in the hand that wrote such elegant letters. 

When Noa asked her to dinner one winter evening, she replied, in shock, 

“Maji?”  Among  the  file  clerks,  Nobuo  Ban  was  a  fascinating  topic  of discussion, but after so many years, with so little change in his behavior, the interested girls had long since given up. It took two dinners, perhaps even less time than that, for Risa to fall in love with Noa, and the two intensely private young people married that winter. 

On their wedding night, Risa was frightened. 

“Will it hurt?” 

“You can tell me to stop. I’d rather hurt myself than hurt you, my wife.” 

Neither had realized the loneliness each had lived with for such a long time until the loneliness was interrupted by genuine affection. 

When Risa got pregnant, she quit her job and stayed home and raised her family  with  as  much  competence  as  she  had  run  the  file  rooms  of  a successful  pachinko  business.  First,  she  had  twin  girls;  then  a  year  later, Risa gave birth to a boy; then a year after that, another girl. 

Every month, Noa traveled for work for two days, but otherwise he kept to a kind of reliable schedule that made it possible to work six days a week for Cosmos and raise his family attentively. Curiously, he did not drink or go out to clubs, even to entertain the police or to be entertained by pachinko machine salesmen. Noa was honest, precise, and could handle any level of business  complication  from  taxes  to  machine  licenses.  Moreover,  he  was not greedy. The owner of Cosmos respected that Noa avoided  mizu shobai. 

Naturally, Risa was grateful; it was easy to lose the affections of a husband to an ambitious bar hostess. 

Like all Japanese mothers, Risa volunteered at the children’s schools and did everything else she could to make sure that her four children were well and safe. Having so many little constituents kept her from having to involve herself with those outside her family. If her father’s death had expelled her from  the  tribe  of  ordinary  middle-class  people,  she  had  effectively reproduced her own tribe. 

The marriage was a stable one, and eight years passed quickly. The couple did  not  quarrel.  Noa  did  not  love  Risa  in  the  way  he  had  his  college girlfriend,  but  that  was  a  good  thing,  he  thought.  Never  again,  he  swore, would he be that vulnerable to another person. Noa remained careful around his new family. Though he valued his wife and children as a kind of second chance, in no way did he see his current life as a rebirth. Noa carried the story of his life as a Korean like a dark, heavy rock within him. Not a day passed when he didn’t fear being discovered. The only thing he continued to do from before was to read his English-language novels. After marrying, he no longer ate at the employees’ cafeteria. Now he allowed himself lunch

at  an  inexpensive  restaurant  where  he  ate  alone.  Over  lunch,  for  thirty minutes a day, he reread Dickens, Trollope, or Goethe, and he remembered who he was inside. 

It was spring when the twin girls turned seven, and the family went to Matsumoto Castle for a Sunday picnic. Risa had planned the outing to cheer up  her  mother,  who  seemed  to  be  retreating  further  into  herself.  The children were overjoyed, since they would get ice cream on the way home. 

The doctor’s widow, Iwamura-san, had never been a competent woman; in  fact,  she  was  often  helpless.  She  had  remained  childishly  pretty—soft, pale cheeks, naturally red lips, and dyed black hair. She wore simple beige smocks  and  cardigans,  closed  only  on  the  top  button.  Her  expression  was perpetually one of a small child who had been disappointed by her birthday present. That said, she was hardly ignorant. She had been a doctor’s wife, and though his death had destroyed her cherished social ambitions, she had not relinquished her wishes for her only child. It was bad enough that her daughter worked in pachinko, but now she had married a man who worked in  the  sordid  business,  cementing  her  caste  in  life.  On  her  initial  meeting with Nobuo Ban, she had guessed that there was something unusual about his  past,  since  he  had  no  family.  No  doubt,  he  was  foreign.  She  felt suspicious  of  his  character;  however,  there  was  also  something  so  sad beneath  his  fine  manners  that  reminded  her  of  her  dear  husband,  that  the widow  felt  compelled  to  overlook  his  background  as  long  as  no  one  ever found out. 

A sparse crowd was forming in front of Matsumoto-jo. A famous docent, popular with the locals, was about to lecture about Japan’s oldest existing castle.  The  old  man  with  wispy  white  eyebrows  and  a  slight  hunch  had brought an easel with him and was setting up his poster-sized photographs and visual aids. Noa’s third child, who had barely eaten anything except for half a rice ball, bolted from his seat and darted toward the guide. Risa was packing up the empty bento boxes and asked Noa to stand near Koichi, a tiny six-year-old boy with a remarkably well-shaped face and head. He had no fear of strangers and would talk to anyone. Once, at the market, he told the  greengrocer  that  his  mother  had  burned  the  eggplant  the  week  before. 

Adults enjoyed talking with Koichi. 

“Sumimasen,  sumimasen!”  the  boy  shouted,  pushing  his  little  body through  the  group  listening  carefully  to  the  guide’s  introduction  to  the castle’s history. 

The crowd parted to let the boy stand in the front. The guide smiled at Koichi and continued. 

The  boy’s  mouth  was  open  a  little,  and  he  listened  intently  while  his father stood in the back. 

The  guide  turned  to  the  next  image  on  the  easel.  In  the  old  black-and-white  photograph,  the  castle  leaned  dramatically  as  if  the  edifice  might collapse.  The  crowd  gasped  politely  at  the  famous  image.  Tourists  and children who had never seen it before looked at the image closely. 

“When  this  magnificent  castle  started  to  list  this  much,  everyone remembered  Tada  Kasuke’s  curse!”  The  guide  widened  his  heavy-lidded eyes for emphasis. 

The adults from the region nodded in recognition. There wasn’t a soul in Nagano  who  didn’t  know  about  the  seventeenth-century  Matsumoto headman  who’d  led  the  Jokyo  Uprising  against  unfair  taxes  and  was executed with twenty-seven others, including his two young sons. 

“What is a curse?” Koichi asked. 

Noa  frowned,  because  the  child  had  been  reminded  repeatedly  that  he must not blurt out questions whenever he wished. 

“A curse?” the guide said, then paused silently for dramatic effect. 

“A curse is a terrible, terrible thing. And a curse with moral power is the worst! Tada Kasuke was unfairly persecuted when he was just trying to save all the good people of Nagano from the exploitation of those who lived in this  castle!  At  his  death,  Tada  Kasuke  uttered  a  curse  against  the  greedy Mizuno clan!” The guide grew visibly impassioned by his own speech. 

Koichi  wanted  to  ask  another  question,  but  his  twin  sisters,  who  were now standing by him, pinched the little bit of flesh around his right elbow. 

Koichi had to learn not to talk so much, they thought; policing him was a family effort. 

“Almost  two  hundred  years  after  Tada  Kasuke’s  death,  the  ruling  clan tried everything in their power to appease the spirit of the martyr to lift the curse. It must have worked, because the castle structure is straight again!” 

The guide raised both arms dramatically and gestured toward the building

behind him. The crowd laughed. 

Koichi stared at the poster-sized image of the listing castle. “How? How do you reverse a curse?” Koichi asked, unable to control himself. 

His sister Ume stepped on his foot, but Koichi did not care. 

“To appease the spirits, the ruling clan proclaimed that Tada Kasuke was a  martyr  and  gave  him  an  afterlife  name.  They  had  a  statue  built. 

Ultimately, the truth must be acknowledged!” 

Koichi  opened  his  mouth  again,  but  this  time  Noa  walked  over  and picked  up  his  son  gently  and  carried  him  back  to  his  mother,  who  was seated  with  her  mother  on  a  bench.  Even  though  he  was  in  kindergarten, Koichi still loved to be picked up. The crowd smiled. 

“Papa, that was so interesting,  nee?” 

“Hai,” Noa replied. When he held the boy, he always recalled Mozasu, who would fall asleep easily in his arms, his round head resting on Noa’s shoulder. 

“Can I put a curse on someone?” Koichi asked. 

“What? Who do you want to put a curse on?” 

“Umeko. She stepped on my foot on purpose.” 

“That’s not very nice, but it doesn’t warrant a curse,  nee?” 

“But I can reverse a curse if I want.” 

“Oh, it isn’t so easy to do so, Koichi-chan. And what would you do if someone put a curse on you?” 

“Soo nee.” Koichi sobered at the thought of this, then broke into a smile when  he  saw  his  mother,  whom  he  loved  more  than  anyone.  Risa  was knitting a sweater as she chatted with her mother. The picnic bags rested at her feet. 

The Ban family walked around the castle grounds, and when the children grew bored, Noa took them to eat ice cream, as he had promised. 

6

Yokohama, July 1974

Haruki Totoyama married Ayame, the foreman of his mother’s uniform shop,  because  his  mother  had  wanted  him  to  do  so.  It  turned  out  to  be  a wise  decision.  When  his  mother  was  diagnosed  with  stomach  cancer  and could no longer manage the shop or take care of Haruki’s brother, Daisuke, Ayame  knew  exactly  what  to  do.  For  two  years,  Ayame  managed  the business  ably,  nursed  her  ailing  mother-in-law,  and  took  good  care  of Daisuke.  When  Totoyama-san  finally  died  after  a  great  deal  of  suffering, Haruki asked his exhausted wife what he should do with his mother’s shop, and Ayame’s answer surprised him. 

“We should sell it and move to Yokohama. I don’t want to live in Osaka anymore. I never liked working at the shop. I did it because I could never disappoint your mother. We don’t have to worry about money anymore. If there’s  any  free  time,  I  want  to  learn  how  to  bake  cakes.  Daisuke  likes cakes. I will stay home and take care of him.” 

Haruki didn’t know what to make of this, but he couldn’t refuse her. 

With the money from the sale of the business and his inheritance, Haruki bought a three-bedroom mansion-style apartment near the old cemetery in Yokohama. The apartment had a double wall oven for Ayame. One phone call to Mozasu led to a call from the Yokohama police chief, who offered Haruki the same job he had in Osaka. Naturally, Mozasu and Solomon were happy  that  Haruki  was  finally  moving  to  Yokohama.  Nevertheless,  upon

Haruki’s family’s arrival, Solomon was not allowed to visit Haruki’s house or to meet Haruki’s younger brother, who was terrified of children. 

Daisuke was almost thirty years old, but he was not much older than five or six mentally. He could not go outside often, because noise, crowds, and bright lights upset him. His mother’s illness and death had been catastrophic for him, but Ayame, a longtime employee of his mother, was able to keep Daisuke calm. She created a predictable routine for him at their new home, and because there were so many foreigners in Yokohama, Ayame was able to find an American special education teacher who was willing to come to the  house  and  work  with  him  five  days  a  week.  Daisuke  would  never  be able to go to a normal school, get a job, or live alone, but Ayame believed that  he  could  do  more  and  that  he  should  know  more  than  what  was expected  of  him,  which  was  very  little.  Haruki  was  grateful  for  her thoughtfulness.  He  could  not  help  but  admire  his  wife’s  ability  to  solve problems and manage so many new things without ever complaining. She was  five  years  older  than  he  was,  the  eldest  daughter  raised  in  a  deeply conservative Buddhist family, and he assumed that her strict upbringing had much to do with her ability to forbear and endure. His mother told him on more than one occasion that Ayame loved him, though he didn’t deserve it. 

Daisuke took a nap in the early afternoon, ate a late lunch, then had three hours  of  at-home  school  with  lessons,  games,  and  story  time  with  his teacher, Miss Edith. During his lessons, Ayame went to the public bath, then did  her  food  shopping.  The  July  heat  in  Yokohama  was  milder  than  back home,  and  Ayame  didn’t  mind  walking  around  after  her  bath.  Invariably, street  dust  and  humidity  would  spoil  that  pure  feeling  that  came  from  a bath, but Ayame felt happy to be alone. She had well over an hour before Miss  Edith  would  leave,  so  she  took  the  greener  path  cutting  through  the wooded  park  by  the  cemetery.  It  was  not  yet  dusk,  and  there  was  still  a bluish  light  left  over  from  the  day.  Beneath  the  canopy  of  bright  green leaves, Ayame felt clean and joyful. For dinner, she planned on picking up a few  sticks  of  the  yakitori  that  Daisuke  was  so  fond  of,  which  an  elderly couple sold a few blocks from their apartment. 

As she walked past a thicket of evergreens, she heard the light rustle of

branches.  From  childhood,  Ayame  had  loved  birds,  even  the  enormous black  crows  that  most  children  feared,  and  she  gingerly  approached  the dense cluster of trees. As she moved closer to the sounds, she could see a nice-looking man leaning against a wide tree trunk with his eyes closed. His trousers  were  pulled  down  to  his  knees  and  another  man  knelt  in  front  of him, his head hovering over the standing man’s pale hips. Ayame held her breath and retreated quietly to the main path. The men had not seen her. She was  not  in  danger,  but  she  walked  faster,  her  heart  beating  as  if  it  would pound itself out of her body. The dry grass poked her sandaled feet. Ayame ran until she reached the pavement border, where she could see pedestrians. 

On the crowded street opposite the cemetery, no one noticed her. Ayame wiped the perspiration from her brow. When was the last time her husband had wanted her? It had been his mother’s suggestion that they marry, and in their brief courtship, Haruki had been thoughtful and kind. She was not a virgin when she married, having had sex with two men who had refused to marry her. There had been one other man, a fabric distributor who pursued her for months, but when Ayame learned that he was married, she refused to go to the love motel with him, because she had only slept with the others as a way to get married, and with this one there was really no point. Unlike the other  men,  Haruki  had  never  asked  her  to  go  with  him  to  a  motel.  She reasoned that it may have been awkward for him since she worked with his mother.  She  could  not  help  admiring  his  high-mindedness  and  good manners. 

Their  marriage  was  consummated.  In  the  beginning,  when  she  and Haruki were trying to have a baby, he made love to her regularly—quickly and  cleanly,  respecting  her  wishes  when  it  was  not  the  right  time  of  the month.  After  they  had  been  attempting  to  have  a  child  for  two  years,  the doctors determined that she was infertile, and it seemed that Daisuke would effectively become her son. They did not make love again. She had never been interested in being the sexy lady, and he did not approach her for such transactions. 

Ayame kept to Daisuke’s schedule and went to bed early, while Haruki woke  up  late  and  went  to  bed  late.  Their  varying  sleep  times  prevented regular encounters in bed. She may not have been interested in sex, but she was  not  unaware  that  in  general,  men  needed  sex,  and  that  it  was  a preferable  situation  to  have  a  husband  who  had  sex  periodically  with  his

own wife. If Haruki and she no longer made love, Ayame blamed herself. 

She was older. Her yellowing face was ordinary and round, and she was far too thin, with spindly legs and arms. Wanting to fill out, she ate as much as she  could,  especially  sweetmeats,  but  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  gain weight.  When  she  was  growing  up,  her  brothers  had  teased  her  that  her chest was more even than the floor. If she’d wanted, she could have worn clothing  for  middle  school  girls.  Out  of  practicality  and  habit,  each  day, Ayame  wore  one  of  the  many  dark-colored  jumpers  that  she’d  sewed  for herself.  She  had  midi-length  jumpers  in  every  fabric  and  color.  In  the summer, her jumpers were made of linen or seersucker. 

When  Ayame  reached  Daisuke’s  favorite  yakitori  stand,  she  fished  out her  purse  from  the  string  bag  holding  her  bath  things  and  asked  the  old woman for grilled chicken wings, gizzards, and pieces of white meat with scallion.  As  the  woman  behind  the  smoky  stand  filled  the  order,  Ayame recalled  the  man  leaning  against  the  tree—his  rapturous  face.  Did  Haruki want her to kneel before him? Of course, she knew of many things that men and women did, but she had never seen anyone else make love. She’d read two  D.  H.  Lawrence  novels.  At  thirty-seven  years  old,  Ayame  wanted  to know  even  more  about  the  things  she  had  never  done.  Would  Haruki  be embarrassed for her? 

Ayame  checked  her  slender  wristwatch  with  its  tiny  face,  a  birthday present from Haruki’s mother. There were still forty minutes left until she had to head home. Ayame turned around. 

When she returned to the thicket of evergreens, the two men were gone, but now there were at least five other couples; women and men were lying together  in  the  more  secluded  areas,  and  two  men  who  were  not  wearing pants stroked each other while whispering. One couple was lying on thick sheets of brown butcher paper that made noise with their movements. When a  tall  woman  spotted  her  looking,  she  didn’t  flinch;  rather,  she  closed  her eyes  and  made  noises  of  pleasure  as  the  man  beside  her  continued  to massage  her  small  breasts.  It  felt  as  if  the  tall  woman  wanted  Ayame  to study  them,  and  Ayame  felt  emboldened  to  move  closer.  The  sounds  of quiet  moaning  from  the  lovers  were  like  evening  bird  calls.  She remembered Daisuke, who would want his dinner. 

Three days later, after another long bath, Ayame went directly to the park behind  the  cemetery.  She  recognized  a  woman  and  man  from  before,  and there were others who did not seem to mind her solitary presence. Everyone here belonged to each other’s secret, and Ayame felt safe among them. As she was leaving, a lovely girl approached her. 

“Why do you come so early? It’s more wonderful in the evening.” 

Ayame didn’t know what to say, but she felt it would be impolite not to reply. 

“What do you mean?” 

“There are more people later if you want to do things.” The girl laughed. 

“Don’t you like to do things?” 

Ayame shook her head. 

“I, I…No.” 

“If you have money, I can do things for you. I prefer to be do things with girls.” 

Ayame  held  her  breath.  The  girl  was  plump  in  a  very  pretty  way,  with vivid  color  in  her  cheeks.  She  had  beautiful  white  arms,  full  and  smooth like those of a woman in an Italian painting. In her sheer georgette blouse in a  cha  color  and  navy  print  skirt,  she  looked  like  an  attractive  office  lady. 

The girl took Ayame’s left hand and slipped it in her blouse; Ayame could feel the smooth rise of the girl’s large nipple. 

“I  like  this  bone  between  your  neck  and  shoulders.  You’re  very  cute. 

Come  see  me.  I’m  here  in  the  evenings.  Today,  I  started  early,  because  I have a meeting, but he’s a little late. I’m usually near the shrubs over there.” 

She giggled. “I love to put things in my mouth.  Nee?” She wet her lips with her strawberry-colored tongue. “And I can bring you toys,” she said, before returning to her spot. 

Stunned, Ayame nodded and walked home. Her left hand felt like it was burning, and with it, she stroked her collarbone, never having given it any thought. 

For three months after, Ayame stuck to her old route to the  sento and went straight  from  there  to  the  market  streets  to  do  her  shopping.  She  returned faithfully to her routines with Daisuke, and when she took her baths at the

 sento, she tried not to think of that girl. Ayame was not ignorant; even as a girl, she knew that others did many curious things. What puzzled her was that so late in her life, she wanted to know more but had no one to ask. Her husband  never  seemed  to  change:  He  was  hardworking,  polite,  and  rarely home. He was affectionate with Daisuke. When he had time off, he went to see his Korean friend Mozasu and his son, Solomon, or took his brother for walks in the park or to the  sento to give her some time alone. Occasionally, the  three  of  them  went  to  the  same   yakiniku  restaurant,  where  the  owner gave them a private room in the back. Daisuke liked cooking his meals on the  grill.  After  Daisuke  fell  asleep  for  the  night,  her  evenings  were  quiet. 

She read recipe books and sewing magazines and crocheted lace. 

Despite  her  strong  efforts,  it  was  no  longer  just  at  the   sento.  Ayame wondered  about  the  girl  all  day—when  she  was  baking  a  golden  sponge cake or merely dusting the furniture. What confused her was that the girl in the green blouse had looked so wholesome and amused, nothing at all like what she’d seen in maudlin films about a fallen woman from a bad family. 

The girl was luscious like a costly melon sold in a department store. 

It  was  a  Saturday  evening  at  the  end  of  November,  and  Daisuke  had fallen  asleep  earlier  than  usual.  Haruki  was  at  the  office  catching  up  on writing reports where it was quiet enough for him to work undisturbed. In the  living  room,  Ayame  was  trying  to  read  a  book  about  English  baking techniques, but she found her mind drifting. Closing the book, she decided to  have  another  bath,  though  she’d  had  one  earlier  that  day.  Daisuke  was snoring quietly when she left the house. 

At the  sento, she soaked in the hot bathwater, fearing that someone could see the desire in her face. She wondered if she could find the nerve to ask her husband to make love to her. When the tips of her fingers were horribly wrinkled, she dressed and combed her hair. Outside, the streetlamps shone brightly,  and  the  black  pavement  glistened  in  the  night.  Ayame  walked toward the cemetery. 

Even in the cold, there were too many lovers to count. Couples watched others make love and masturbate each other. Naked bodies humped beneath large trees. Men lined up in a row while others on their knees bobbed their heads  against  them.  Watching  the  men’s  faces  thrilled  her.  She  wanted Haruki to take her into his arms and make violent love to her there. There was only a little light in the evening sky, only a small misshapen moon and

the faintest spray of winter stars. Ayame walked through the arrangements of  men  and  women.  By  an  impressive  oak,  two  men  embraced  in lovemaking, and the taller man, whose arms clasped the younger one, wore a gray suit much like the one she had made for her husband. Ayame looked closer and saw him, his eyes shut tightly as he held on to the young man in the white cotton undershirt who was gasping with excitement. She retreated to the other side of the foliage to hide herself. Ayame held her breath, and she watched her husband making love. It was. It was him. 

When Haruki and the young man in the white shirt were done, they put on their clothes without talking and walked away from one another without a  bow  or  a  good-bye.  She  didn’t  see  Haruki  giving  the  young  man  any money, but that could have happened earlier; she couldn’t be sure of how these  things  worked.  Would  it  matter  if  the  man  had  been  paid?  she wondered. 

Ayame sat down on the roots of an old tree not far from a couple having breathless intercourse, and she stared at the pads of her fingers, which were smooth again. There was no choice but to wait until he was long gone, but if he reached the house before she did, she’d have to tell him that she was at the  sento, which wasn’t true. 

“Hi.” 

The  girl  wore  a  white  blouse  this  time,  and  it  shimmered  in  the  dark, making her look like an angel. 

“Did you bring money?” 

The girl crouched down to Ayame’s level and heaved her bosom toward her face as if readying to nurse her. She opened her blouse and pulled out her breasts, propping them over the fabric cups of her underwire brassiere. 

The  girl  was  beautiful.  Ayame  wondered  why  she  could  not  possess features  as  lovely  and  alluring  on  her  withered  body  that  could  neither conceive nor be loved. 

“You can pay me after if you want.” The girl glanced at Ayame’s string bag.  “You’ve  had  your  bath  like  a  good  baby,  and  you’re  clean.  Come  to Mama. Here, you can put your mouth on them. I like that. Then I can do it to  you.  Aka-chan,  you  look  afraid,  but  why?  This  will  feel  so  nice  and sweet.”  The  girl  took  Ayame’s  right  hand  and  pushed  it  up  her  skirt,  and Ayame felt another woman for the first time. It was soft and plush. 

“Daijoubu?” On her knees, the girl moved closer and took Ayame’s left

hand and put her ring finger into her mouth as she climbed onto Ayame’s lap. She sniffed Ayame’s wet hair. “I can almost drink your shampoo. You smell so pretty.  Aka,  aka, you’ll feel better as we make love. You’ll be in paradise.” 

Ayame folded herself into the warmth of the girl’s body. 

As she opened her mouth, the girl pulled the string bag to her. 

“Do you have money here? I need a lot. Mama has to buy many things to look pretty for her baby.” 

Ayame recoiled and heaved the girl off her body, making her fall on her back. 

“You’re disgusting. Disgusting.” She got up. 

“You  skinny  old  cunt!”  the  girl  shouted,  and  Ayame  could  hear  her throaty laugh from a distance. “You have to pay for love, you bitch!” 

Ayame ran back to the  sento. 

When she finally returned home, Haruki was fixing his brother a snack. 

“Tadaima,” she said quietly. 

“Where were you, A-chan?” Daisuke asked, his face folded with worry. 

He had the lopsided face of a pale, gaunt man with the extraordinary eyes of a very young child—unguarded and capable of expressing joy. He wore the yellow pajamas that she had ironed for him that morning. 

Haruki nodded and smiled at her. He had never before found his brother alone. Daisuke had been crying on his bed mat, asking for his mother. He didn’t want to tell Ayame this for fear of making her feel bad about being late. 

“I was at the bath, Dai-chan. I’m very sorry I’m late. I thought you were sleeping, and it was cold so I went to have another bath.” 

“I was afraid. I was afraid,” Daisuke said, his eyes beginning to well up again. “I want Mama.” 

She felt unable to look at Haruki’s face. He had not yet removed his suit jacket. 

Daisuke went to her, leaving Haruki by the kitchen counter to put away the box of  senbei. 

“A-chan is clean. She had a bath. A-chan is clean. She had a bath.” He

sang the line that he liked to repeat after she came home from the  sento. 

“Are you tired now?” she asked him. 

“No.” 

“Would you like me to read to you?” 

“Hai.” 

Haruki left them in the living room with her reading a picture book about old trains, and she nodded to him when he said good night before going to bed. 

7

Yokohama, March 1976

A  retiring  detective  had  failed  to  complete  a  report  of  a  suicide,  and eventually  it  landed  on  Haruki’s  desk.  A  twelve-year-old  Korean  boy  had jumped  off  the  roof  of  his  apartment  building.  The  mother  was  too hysterical to finish the interview at the time, but the parents were willing to meet Haruki tonight after they finished work. 

The  boy’s  parents  lived  not  far  from  Chinatown.  The  father  was  a plumber’s  assistant,  and  the  mother  worked  in  a  glove  factory.  Tetsuo Kimura, the jumper, was the oldest of three and had two sisters. 

Even  before  the  apartment  door  opened,  the  familiar  smells  of  garlic, shoyu, and the stronger miso that Koreans favored greeted him in the damp hallway. All the tenants of the six-story building owned by a Korean were also Koreans. The boy’s mother, her face downcast and meek, let him into the three-room apartment. Haruki slipped off his street shoes to put on the slippers she gave him. In the main room, the father, wearing a workman’s clean overalls, was already seated cross-legged on a blue floor cushion. The mother  set  out  a  discount-store  tray  brimming  with  teacups  and  wrapped biscuits from the  conbini. The father held a bound book in his lap. 

After  handing  the  father  his  business  card  with  two  hands,  Haruki  sat down on a floor cushion. The mother poured him a cup of tea and sat with her knees folded. 

“You  didn’t  get  a  chance  to  see  this.”  The  father  handed  the  book  to

Haruki.  “You  should  know  what  happened.  Those  children  should  be punished.” 

The father, a long-waisted man with an olive complexion and a square jaw, didn’t make eye contact when speaking. 

The  book  was  a  middle  school  graduation  album.  Haruki  opened  the thick volume to the page marked with a slip of blank notepaper. There were rows and columns of black-and-white photographs of students, all of them wearing uniforms—a few smiling, some showing teeth, with little variation overall. Right away he spotted Tetsuo, who had his mother’s long face and his  father’s  small  mouth—a  mild-looking  boy  with  thin  shoulders.  There were a few handwritten messages over the faces of the photographs. 

“Tetsuo—good luck in high school. Hiroshi Noda.” 

“You draw well. Kayako Mitsuya.” 

Haruki  must  have  looked  confused,  because  he  didn’t  notice  anything unusual. Then the father prompted him to check the flyleaf. 

“Die, you ugly Korean.” 

“Stop collecting welfare. Koreans are ruining this country.” 

“Poor people smell like farts.” 

“If you kill yourself, our high school next year will have one less filthy Korean.” 

“Nobody likes you.” 

“Koreans are troublemakers and pigs. Get the hell out. Why are you here anyway?” 

“You smell like garlic and garbage!!!” 

“If I could, I’d cut your head off myself, but I don’t want to get my knife dirty!” 

The  handwriting  was  varied  and  inauthentic.  Some  letters  slanted  right or left; multiple authors had tried purposefully to shield their identities. 

Haruki closed the book and laid it beside him on the clean floor. He took a sip of tea. 

“Your son, he never mentioned that others were bothering him?” 

“No,”  the  mother  answered  quickly.  “He  never  complained.  Never.  He said he was never discriminated against.” 

Haruki nodded. 

“It  was  not  because  he  was  Korean.  That  sort  of  thing  was  from  long ago.  Things  are  better  now.  We  know  many  kindhearted  Japanese,”  the

mother said. 

Even with the cover closed, Haruki could see the words in his mind. The electric fan on the floor circulated a constant flow of warm air. 

“Did you speak with his teachers?” the mother asked. 

The retired detective had. The teachers had said that the boy was a strong student but too quiet. 

“He  had  top  marks.  The  children  were  jealous  of  him  because  he  was smarter  than  they  were.  My  son  learned  to  read  when  he  was  three,”  the mother said. 

The father sighed and laid his hand gently on his wife’s forearm, and she said no more. 

The boy’s father said, “Last winter, Tetsuo asked if he could stop going to school and instead work in the vegetable store that his uncle owns. It’s a small  shop  near  the  little  park  down  the  street.  My  brother-in-law  was looking for a boy to break down boxes and work as a cashier. Tetsuo said he wanted to work for him, but we said no. Neither of us finished high school, and we didn’t want him to quit. It didn’t make any sense for him to work in a  job  like  that  and  to  give  up  school  when  he’s  such  a  good  student.  My brother-in-law is barely getting by himself, so my son would not have made much of a salary. My wife wanted him to get a good job in an electronics factory. If he had finished high school, then—” 

The father covered his head with his large, rough hands, pressing down on his coarse hair. “Working in the basement of a grocery store. Counting inventory. That’s not an easy life for anyone, you know,” he said. “He was talented.  He  could  remember  any  face  and  draw  it  perfectly.  He  could  do many things we didn’t know how to do.” 

The mother said calmly, “My son was hardworking and honest. He never hurt anyone. He helped his sisters do their homework—” 

Her voice broke off. 

Suddenly, the father turned to face Haruki. 

“The boys who wrote that should be punished. I don’t mean go to jail, but they shouldn’t be allowed to write such things.” He shook his head. 

“He should’ve quit school. It would’ve been better if he’d worked in a basement  of  a  grocery  store  or  peeling  bags  of  onions  in  a   yakiniku restaurant. I’d rather have my son than no son. My wife and I are treated badly  here,  but  it’s  because  we’re  poor.  There  are  rich  Koreans  who  are

better off. We thought it could be different for our children.” 

“You were born here?” Haruki asked. Their accent was no different than that of native Japanese speakers from Yokohama. 

“Yes, of course. Our parents came from Ulsan.” 

Ulsan  was  in  what  was  now  South  Korea,  but  Haruki  guessed  that  the family was affiliated with the North Korean government, as were many of the ethnic Koreans.  Mindan was much less popular. The Kimuras probably lacked the tuition for the North Korean schools and sent them to the local Japanese school. 

“You’re  Chosenjin?” 

“Yes, but what does that matter?” the father said. 

“It  doesn’t.  It  shouldn’t.  Excuse  me.”  Haruki  glanced  at  the  album. 

“Does the school know? About this? There was nothing in the report about any other kids.” 

“I  took  the  afternoon  off  to  show  it  to  the  principal.  He  said  it  was impossible to know who wrote those things,” the father said. 

“Soo,  soo,” Haruki said. 

“Why can’t the children who wrote this be punished? Why?” the mother asked. 

“There were several people who witnessed him jump with no one else on the roof. Your son was not pushed. We cannot arrest everyone who says or writes something mean-spirited—” 

“Why can’t the police make the principal—” The father looked directly at  him,  then,  seeing  Haruki’s  defeated  expression,  the  father  stared  at  the door  instead.  “You  people  work  together  to  make  sure  nothing  ever changes.  Sho ga nai.  Sho ga nai. That’s all I ever hear.” 

“I’m sorry. I am sorry,” he said before leaving. 

Paradaisu  Yokohama  was  crowded  at  eight  o’clock  in  the  evening.  The volcanic rush of tinny bells, the clanging of tiny hammers across miniature metal  bowls,  the  beeping  and  flashing  of  colorful  lights,  and  the  throaty shouts  of  welcome  from  the  obsequious  staff  felt  like  a  reprieve  from  the painful  silence  in  his  head.  Haruki  didn’t  even  mind  the  thick  swirls  of tobacco  smoke  that  hung  like  a  layer  of  gray  mist  above  the  heads  of  the

players seated opposite the rows upon rows of vertical, animated machines. 

As  soon  as  Haruki  stepped  into  the  parlor,  the  Japanese  floor  manager rushed to him and asked if he would like tea. Boku-san was in the office in a  meeting  with  a  machine  salesman  and  promised  to  be  down  shortly. 

Haruki and Mozasu had a standing dinner arrangement every Thursday, and Haruki was here to pick him up. 

It was fair to say that almost everyone at the parlor wanted to make some extra  money  by  gambling.  However,  the  players  also  came  to  escape  the eerily  quiet  streets  where  few  said  hello,  to  keep  away  from  the  loveless homes  where  wives  slept  with  children  instead  of  husbands,  and  to  avoid the overheated rush-hour train cars where it was okay to push but not okay to  talk  to  strangers.  When  Haruki  was  a  younger  man,  he  had  not  been much of a pachinko player, but since moving to Yokohama, Haruki allowed himself to find some comfort here. 

It took no time for him to lose several thousand yen, so he bought another tray  of  balls.  Haruki  wasn’t  reckless  about  his  inheritance,  but  his  mother had saved so much that he’d have enough even if he was fired, and even if he lost a fortune. When Haruki paid young men to sleep with him, he could afford to be generous. Of all the vices, pachinko seemed like a petty one. 

The small metal balls zigzagged rhythmically across the rectangular face of  the  machine,  and  Haruki  moved  the  dial  steadily  to  keep  the  action going.  No, he had wanted to tell Tetsuo’s father,  how can I prove guilt for a crime that doesn’t exist? I cannot punish and I cannot prevent.  No, he could not say such things. Not to anyone. So much he could never say. Since he was a child, Haruki had wanted to hang himself, and he thought of it still. 

Of all the crimes, Haruki understood murder-suicides the best; if he could have,  he  would’ve  killed  Daisuke,  then  himself.  But  he  could  never  kill Daisuke.  And  now  he  could  not  do  such  an  unspeakable  thing  to  Ayame. 

They were innocent. 

The machine died suddenly. He looked up and saw Mozasu holding the plug  to  the  extension  cord.  He  wore  a  black  suit  with  a  red  Paradaisu Yokohama pin on his jacket lapel. 

“How much did you lose, dummy?” 

“A lot. Half my pay?” 

Mozasu  pulled  out  his  wallet  and  handed  Haruki  a  sheaf  of  yen  notes, but Haruki wouldn’t take it. 

“It’s my own fault. Sometimes I win, right?” 

“Not that often.” Mozasu tucked the money into Haruki’s coat pocket. 

At the  izakaya, Mozasu ordered beer and poured Haruki his first drink from the large bottle. They sat at the long counter on carved wooden stools. The owner  laid  out  the  dish  of  warm,  salted  soybeans,  because  they  always started with those. 

“What’s the matter with you?” Mozasu asked. “You look like shit.” 

“A kid jumped off a building. Had to talk with his parents today.” 

“Ugh. How old?” 

“Middle school. Korean.” 

“Ehh?” 

“You should have seen what the rotten kids wrote on his yearbook.” 

“Probably the same shit kids wrote in mine.” 

“Maji?” 

“Yeah, every year, a bunch of knuckleheads would tell me to go back to Korea or to die a slow death. Just mean kid stuff.” 

“Who? Anyone I know?” 

“It  was  a  long  time  ago.  Besides,  what  are  you  going  to  do?  Arrest them?” Mozasu laughed. “So, you’re sad about that? About the kid?” 

Haruki nodded. 

“You have a weakness for Koreans,” Mozasu said, smiling. “You idiot.” 

Haruki started to cry. 

“What the hell? Hey, hey.” Mozasu patted his back. 

The owner behind the counter looked away and wiped down the counter space of a customer who’d just left. 

Haruki clasped his head with his right hand and closed his wet eyes. 

“The poor kid couldn’t take any more.” 

“Listen,  man,  there’s  nothing  you  can  do.  This  country  isn’t  going  to change. Koreans like me can’t leave. Where we gonna go? But the Koreans back  home  aren’t  changing,  either.  In  Seoul,  people  like  me  get  called

Japanese  bastards,  and  in  Japan,  I’m  just  another  dirty  Korean  no  matter how  much  money  I  make  or  how  nice  I  am.  So  what  the  fuck?  All  those people who went back to the North are starving to death or scared shitless.” 

Mozasu patted down his pockets for cigarettes. 

“People are awful. Drink some beer.” 

Haruki took a sip and coughed, having swallowed wrong. 

“When I was a boy, I wanted to die,” Haruki said. 

“Me too. Every fucking day, I thought it would be better if I died, but I couldn’t do it to my mother. Then after I left school, I didn’t feel that way anymore. But after Yumi died, I didn’t know if I was going to make it. You know?  But  then  I  couldn’t  do  it  to  Solomon.  And  my  mother,  well,  you know, she changed after Noa disappeared. I can never let her down like that. 

My mother said that my brother left because he couldn’t handle Waseda and was ashamed. I don’t think that’s true. Nothing in school was ever hard for him.  He’s  living  somewhere  else,  and  he  doesn’t  want  us  to  find  him.  I think he just got tired of trying to be a good Korean and quit. I was never a good Korean.” 

Mozasu lit his cigarette. 

“But things get better. Life is shitty, but not all the time. Etsuko’s great. I didn’t expect her to come along. You know, I’m going to help her open a restaurant.” 

“She’s  a  nice  lady.  Maybe  you’ll  get  married  again.”  Haruki  liked Mozasu’s new Japanese girlfriend.

Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

“Etsuko  doesn’t  want  to  get  married  again.  Her  kids  hate  her  enough already. It’d be hell for her if she married a Korean pachinko guy.” Mozasu snorted. 

Haruki’s sad expression remained. 

“Man,  life’s  going  to  keep  pushing  you  around,  but  you  have  to  keep playing.” 

Haruki nodded. 

“I used to think if my father hadn’t left, then I’d be okay,” Haruki said. 

“Forget him. Your mother was a great lady; my wife thought she was the best  of  the  best.  Tough  and  smart  and  always  fair  to  everyone.  She  was better than having five fathers. Yumi said she was the only Japanese she’d ever work for.” 

“Yeah. Mama was a great lady.” 

The owner brought out the fried oysters and  shishito peppers. 

Haruki wiped his eyes with a cocktail napkin, and Mozasu poured him another glass of beer. 

“I didn’t know kids wrote that stuff on your yearbooks. You were always watching out for me. I didn’t know.” 

“Forget it. I’m okay. I’m okay now.” 

8

Nagano, August 1978

Hansu’s driver found her waiting at the north gate of Yokohama Station as instructed, and he led Sunja to the black sedan, where Hansu was sitting in the back. 

Sunja arranged herself in the plush velvet backseat, pulling down her suit jacket  to  cover  the  swell  of  her   ajumma  abdomen.  She  wore  an  imported French  designer  dress  and  Italian  leather  shoes  that  Mozasu’s  girlfriend, Etsuko, had selected for her. At sixty-two years, Sunja looked like what she was—a mother of two grown men, a grandmother, and a woman who had spent  most  of  her  life  working  outdoors.  Despite  the  clothes  of  a  wealthy Tokyo matron, her wrinkled and spotted skin and short white hair couldn’t help but make her look rumpled and ordinary. 

“Where are we going?” 

“Nagano,” Hansu replied. 

“Is that where he is?” 

“Yes. He goes by Nobuo Ban. He’s been there continuously for sixteen years. He’s married to a Japanese woman and has four children.” 

“Solomon has four cousins! Why couldn’t he tell us?” 

“He  is  now  Japanese.  No  one  in  Nagano  knows  he’s  Korean.  His  wife and children don’t know. Everyone in his world thinks he is pure Japanese.” 

“Why?” 

“Because he does not want anyone to know about his past.” 

“Is it so easy to do this?” 

“It’s easy enough, and in his world, no one cares enough to dig around.” 

“What do you mean?” 

“He runs a pachinko parlor.” 

“Like  Mozasu?”  There  were  Koreans  in  every  aspect  of  the  pachinko business, from the parlors and the  keihin to the machine manufacturers, but she would have never expected Noa to do the same thing as Mozasu. 

“Soo nee. How is Mozasu?” Hansu asked. 

“Good.” She nodded, having a hard time concentrating. 

“His business okay?” 

“He bought another parlor in Yokohama.” 

“And Solomon? He must be very big now.” 

“He’s doing well at school. Studying hard. I want to know more about Noa.” 

“He is well off.” Hansu smiled. 

“Does he know we’re coming to see him?” 

“No.” 

“But—” 

“He  doesn’t  want  to  see  us.  Well,  he  doesn’t  want  to  see  me.  He  may want to see you, but if he had, surely he would’ve let you know sooner.” 

“Then—” 

“We should not speak to him today, but I thought if you wanted to see him with your own eyes, you could. He is going to be at his main office.” 

“How do you know this?” 

“I  just  do,”  Hansu  said,  closing  his  eyes  and  leaning  against  the  white lace-covered  headrest.  He  was  taking  several  medications,  and  they  made him feel foggy. 

It was his plan to wait until Noa came out of his office as he usually did to  have  lunch  at  the   soba-ya  across  the  street.  Each  weekday,  he  ate  a simple  lunch  at  a  different  restaurant,  and  on  Wednesdays  he  ate  soba. 

Hansu’s private investigators had detailed Noa’s life in Nagano in a twenty-six-page  report,  and  what  was  most  notable  was  his  unwavering  need  for routine. Noa did not drink alcohol, gamble, or fool around with women. He had no apparent religion, and his wife and four children lived like a middle-class Japanese family in a modest house. 

“Will he eat lunch by himself, do you think?” 

“He  always  eats  lunch  by  himself.  Today  is  Wednesday  so  he  will  eat zaru  soba,  taking  less  than  fifteen  minutes.  He  will  read  a  little  of  his English novel, then return to his office. This is why he is so successful, I think.  He  does  not  make  mistakes.  Noa  has  a  plan.”  There  was  a  kind  of territorial pride in Hansu’s voice. 

“Do you think he’ll see me?” 

“It’s hard to tell,” he said. “You should wait in the car and get a glimpse of him, then the driver will take us back to Yokohama. We can return next week if you like. Maybe you can write to him first.” 

“What’s the difference between today and next week?” 

“Maybe if you see him and know that he is well, then you will not need to see him so much. He has chosen this life, Sunja, and maybe he wants us to respect that.” 

“He’s my son.” 

“And mine.” 

“Noa and Mozasu. They’re my life.” 

Hansu nodded. He had never felt this way about his children. Not really. 

“I’ve lived only for them.” 

This  was  wrong  to  say.  At  church,  the  minister  preached  about  how mothers  cared  too  much  about  their  children  and  that  worshipping  the family  was  a  kind  of  idolatry.  One  must  not  love  one’s  family  over  God, he’d said. The minister said that families could never give you what only God could give. But being a mother who loved her children too much had helped  her  to  understand  a  little  of  what  God  went  through.  Noa  had children  of  his  own  now;  perhaps  he  could  understand  how  much  she’d lived for him. 

“Look. He’s coming out,” Hansu said. 

Her  son’s  face  had  changed  only  a  little.  The  graying  hair  along  the temples surprised her, but Noa was forty-five years old and no longer the university student. He wore round, golden spectacles much like those Isak used to wear, and his black suit hung simply on his lean frame. His face was a copy of Hansu’s. 

Sunja opened the car door and stepped out. 

“Noa!” she cried, and rushed toward him. 

He turned around and stared at his mother, who stood not ten paces from him. 

“Umma,” he murmured. Noa moved close to her and touched her arm. 

He had not seen his mother cry since Isak’s funeral. She was not the sort to cry  easily,  and  he  felt  bad  for  her.  He  had  imagined  that  this  day  would come and had prepared for it, but now that she was here, he was surprised by his own sense of relief. 

“There’s no need to be upset. We should go inside my office,” he said. 

“How did you get here?” 

Sunja couldn’t speak because she was heaving. She took a deep breath. 

“Koh  Hansu  brought  me  here.  He  found  you,  and  he  brought  me  here because I wanted to see you. He’s in the car.” 

“I see,” he said. “Well, he can stay there.” 

Upon  his  return  to  the  office,  his  employees  bowed,  and  Sunja  followed behind. He offered her a seat in his office and closed the door. 

“You look well,  umma,” Noa said. 

“It has been such a long time, Noa. I’ve worried so much about you.” 

Seeing his hurt expression, she stopped herself. “But I’m glad you wrote to me. I have saved all the money you sent. It was very thoughtful of you to do that.” 

Noa nodded. 

“Hansu told me that you’re married and you have children.” 

Noa  smiled.  “I  have  one  boy  and  three  girls.  They  are  very  good  kids. 

All of them study except for my son, who is a good baseball player. He is my wife’s favorite. He looks like Mozasu and acts like him, too.” 

“I know Mozasu would like to see you. When can you come to see us?” 

“I don’t know. I don’t know if I can.” 

“Haven’t  we  wasted  enough  time?  All  these  years.  Noa,  have  mercy. 

Have mercy, please.  Umma was a girl when I met Hansu. I didn’t know he was married, and when I found out, I refused to be his mistress. Then your father  married  me  so  you  could  have  a  proper  name.  All  my  life,  I  was faithful to your father, Baek Isak, who was a great man. Even after he died, 

I have been true to his—” 

“I  understand  what  you  did.  However,  my  blood  father  is  Koh  Hansu. 

That cannot change,” Noa said flatly. 

“Yes.” 

“I’m a Korean working in this filthy business. I suppose having yakuza in your blood is something that controls you. I can never be clean of him.” 

He laughed. “This is my curse.” 

“But  you’re  not  a  yakuza,”  she  protested.  “Are  you?  Mozasu  owns pachinko  parlors  and  he’s  very  honest.  He’s  always  saying  how  it  is possible to be a good employer and to avoid the bad people as long as you

—” 

Noa shook his head. 

“Umma,  I  am  honest,  but  there  are  people  you  cannot  avoid  in  this business. I run a very large company, and I do what I have to do.” He made a face like he’d tasted something sour. 

“You’re a good boy, Noa. I know you are—” she said, then felt foolish for having called him a child. “I mean, I’m sure you’re a good businessman. 

And honest.” 

The  two  sat  quietly.  Noa  covered  his  mouth  with  his  right  hand.  His mother looked like an old exhausted woman. 

“Do you want some tea?” he asked. Over the years, Noa had imagined his mother or brother coming to his house, discovering him there rather than in his white, sun-filled office. She’d made it easier for him by coming here instead. Would Hansu come to his office next? he wondered. It had taken longer for Hansu to find him than he’d expected. 

“Would you like something to eat? I can order something—” 

Sunja shook her head. “You should come home.” 

He laughed. “This is my home. I am not a boy.” 

“I’m not sorry to have had you. You are a treasure to me. I won’t leave

—” 

“No one knows I’m Korean. Not one person.” 

“I won’t tell anyone. I understand. I’ll do whatever—” 

“My  wife  doesn’t  know.  Her  mother  would  never  tolerate  it.  My  own children don’t know, and I will not tell them. My boss would fire me. He doesn’t employ foreigners.  Umma, no one can know—” 

“Is it so terrible to be Korean?” 

“It is terrible to be me.” 

Sunja nodded and stared at her folded hands. 

“I have prayed for you, Noa. I have prayed that God would protect you. 

It is all a mother can do. I’m glad you are well.” Each morning, she went to the dawn service and prayed for her children and grandson. She had prayed for this moment. 

“The children, what are their names?” 

“What does it matter?” 

“Noa, I’m so sorry. Your father brought us to Japan, and then, you know, we  couldn’t  leave  because  of  the  war  here  and  then  the  war  there.  There was no life for us back home, and now it’s too late. Even for me.” 

“I went back,” he said. 

“What do you mean?” 

“I’m a Japanese citizen now, and I can travel. I went to South Korea to visit. To see my supposed motherland.” 

“You’re a Japanese citizen? How? Really?” 

“It’s possible. It is always possible.” 

“And did you go to Busan?” 

“Yes, and I visited Yeongdo. It was tiny but beautiful,” he said. 

Sunja’s eyes filled with tears. 

“Umma,  I  have  a  meeting  now.  I’m  sorry,  but  why  don’t  we  see  each other next week? I’ll come by. I want to see Mozasu again. I have to take care of some urgent things now.” 

“Really? You’ll come?” Sunja smiled. “Oh, thank you, Noa. I’m so glad. 

You’re such a good—” 

“It’s  best  if  you  leave  now.  I’ll  phone  you  later  tonight  when  you  get home.” 

Sunja got up quickly from her seat, and Noa walked her back to the spot where they met. He would not look into Hansu’s car. 

“We’ll talk later,” he said, and crossed the street toward his building. 

Sunja watched her son enter his office building, then tapped the passenger door of Hansu’s car. The driver came out and held the door open for her. 

Hansu nodded. 

Sunja smiled, feeling light and hopeful. 

Hansu looked at her face carefully and frowned. 

“You should not have seen him.” 

“It  went  well.  He’ll  come  to  Yokohama  next  week.  Mozasu  will  be  so happy.” 

Hansu told the driver to go. He listened to her talk about their meeting. 

That evening, when Noa did not call her, she realized that she had not given him  her  home  number  in  Yokohama.  In  the  morning,  Hansu  phoned  her. 

Noa had shot himself a few minutes after she’d left his office. 

9

Yokohama, 1979

Etsuko Nagatomi loved all three of her children, but she did not love them all  the  same.  Being  a  mother  had  taught  her  that  this  kind  of  emotional injustice was perhaps inevitable. 

By midmorning, Etsuko had finished everything she had to get done for Solomon’s party and was sitting in her office in the back of the airy, birch-paneled  restaurant.  She  was  forty-two  years  old,  a  native  of  Hokkaido who’d moved to Yokohama following her divorce six years before. She had maintained  a  youthful  prettiness  that  she  felt  was  important  to  being  a restaurant owner. Etsuko wore her jet-colored hair in a chignon style to set off  her  lively,  egg-shaped  face.  From  afar  she  could  appear  stern,  but  up close her face was animated, and her small, friendly eyes missed nothing. 

She  applied  her  makeup  expertly,  having  worn  rouge  and  powder  since middle school, and the red wool Saint Laurent suit that Mozasu had bought her flattered her reedy figure. 

Though Etsuko would normally have been pleased with herself for being so ahead of schedule, today she was not. She continued to stare at the phone message  from  her  high  school–aged  daughter,  Hana,  with  an  unfamiliar Tokyo  number.  How  did  Hana  get  there  from  Hokkaido?  Calls  with  her daughter  could  take  five  minutes  or  an  hour,  depending,  and  Mozasu  was coming to pick her up soon. Her boyfriend was a patient man about many things,  but  he  liked  her  to  be  punctual.  Etsuko  dialed  anyway,  and  Hana

picked up on the first ring. 

“I’ve been waiting.” 

“I’m sorry. I just got the message.” Etsuko was afraid of her fifteen-year-old daughter, but she had been trying to sound more firm, the way she was with her staff. 

“Where are you?” 

“I’m four months pregnant.” 

“Nani?” 

Etsuko  could  almost  see  her  daughter’s  large,  unblinking  eyes.  Hana resembled the girls in comic books with her cute lollipop head and small, girlish body. She dressed to get attention—short skirts, sheer blouses, and high-heeled  boots—and  accordingly,  she  received  that  attention  from  all kinds of men. This was her  unmei, Etsuko thought; her ex-husband used to dismiss  this  idea  of  fate  as  a  lazy  explanation  for  the  bad  choices  people made. Regardless, life had only confirmed her belief that there was indeed a pattern  to  it  all.  To  Etsuko,  this  had  to  happen,  because  as  a  girl  she  had been  no  different.  When  she  was  seventeen,  she  had  been  pregnant  with Tatsuo, Hana’s oldest brother. 

Etsuko  and  Hana  remained  silent  on  the  line,  but  the  poor  phone reception crackled like a campfire. 

“I’m in Tokyo at a friend’s.” 

“Who?” 

“It’s just some friend’s cousin who lives here. Listen, I want to come to your place right away.” 

“Why?” 

“What do you think? You have to help me with this.” 

“Does your father know?” 

“Are you stupid?” 

“Hana—” 

“I know how to get to you. I have the money. I’ll call you when I arrive.” 

Hana hung up. 

Two years after the divorce, when Hana was eleven, she’d asked Etsuko if they could talk to each other like friends rather than mother and child, and

Etsuko had agreed because she was grateful that her daughter continued to talk to her at all. Also, Etsuko agreed because when she’d been a girl, she had lied to her mother and father about everything. But Etsuko found that being detached as a mother had its own burdens. She wasn’t allowed to ask any  prying  questions,  and  if  she  sounded  too  concerned  (something  Hana hated), her daughter hung up the phone and wouldn’t call for weeks. 

Etsuko had many regrets about her life in Hokkaido, but what she was most  sorry  about  was  what  her  reputation  had  done  to  her  children.  Her grown sons still refused to talk to her. And she had only worsened matters by continuing to see Mozasu. Her sister Mari and her mother urged her to end it. The pinball business was dirty, they said; pachinko gave off a strong odor of poverty and criminality. But she couldn’t give him up. Mozasu had changed  her  life.  He  was  the  only  man  she  had  never  cheated  on—

something Etsuko had never believed could be possible. 

The  spring  before  her  thirty-sixth  birthday,  when  she  was  still  married and living in Hokkaido, Etsuko had seduced another one of her high school boyfriends.  She  had  been  having  a  series  of  affairs  for  almost  three  years with various men from her adolescence. What amazed her was how difficult it  was  the  first  time  but  how  effortless  it  was  to  have  all  the  others  that followed. Married men wanted invitations from married women. It was no trouble to phone a man she had slept with twenty years ago and invite him to her house for lunch when her children were at school. 

That spring, she began sleeping with a boyfriend from her freshman year in high school. He’d grown into a handsome, married playboy who still had the tendency to talk too much. One afternoon, in her tiny Hokkaido living room,  as  the  playboy  was  getting  dressed  to  return  to  his  office,  he bemoaned the fact that she wouldn’t leave her husband, who preferred the company of his work colleagues to hers. He laid his head between her small breasts and said, “But I can leave my wife. Tell me to do it.” To this, she said nothing. Etsuko had no intention of leaving Nori and the children. Her complaint about her husband was not that he was boring or that he wasn’t home enough. Nori was not a bad person. It was just that she felt like she had no clear sense of him after nineteen years of marriage, and she doubted that she ever would. He didn’t seem to need her except to be a wife in name and a mother to his children. For Nori, this was enough. 

There was no good excuse for her behavior. She knew that. But at night, 

when  Nori  sat  at  the  kitchen  table  to  eat  the  dinner  that  had  gotten  cold because he’d come home late once again from another company gathering, she  waited  for  something  to  come,  some  insight,  some  feeling.  As  she watched  him  with  his  eyes  locked  to  his  rice  bowl,  she  wanted  to  shake him, because in all her life she had never expected this kind of loneliness. 

Around that time, someone had handed her a cult pamphlet as she came out of  the  grocery  store.  On  the  flimsy  cover,  a  middle-aged  housewife  was pictured as half skeleton and half flesh. On the bottom of the page it said, 

“Every day you are closer to your death. You are half-dead already. Where does  your  identity  come  from?”  She  tossed  the  pamphlet  away  almost  as soon as she got it, but the picture stayed with her for a long while. 

The last time she saw the playboy, he gave her a sheaf of poems that he had written for her. As he left through the kitchen door, he confessed that he loved only her. His eyes pooled with tears as he told her that she was his heart.  For  the  rest  of  the  day,  she  ignored  the  housework  and  read  and reread the maudlin and erotic poems. She couldn’t say if they were good or not,  but  she  was  pleased  by  them.  Etsuko  privately  marveled  at  the  effort they must have taken, and she reasoned that in his showy way, he did love her. Finally, this one affair had given her what she had wanted from all the others—an  assurance  that  whatever  she  had  handed  out  so  freely  in  her youth had neither died nor disappeared. 

That night, when her family was sleeping, Etsuko soaked in the wooden tub and glowed in what felt to her like a victory. After her bath, she dressed in  her  blue-and-white   yukata  and  headed  toward  her  bedroom,  where  her innocent husband was snoring gently. One sad thing seemed clear to her: If she needed all the men who had ever loved her to continue loving her, she would  always  be  divided.  She  would  always  cheat,  and  she’d  never  be  a good person. It dawned on her then that being a good person was something she had not given up on completely after all. Would she die living this way? 

In the morning, she told the playboy not to call her anymore, and he didn’t. 

He just moved on to the next pretty housewife in town. 

But  a  few  months  later,  Nori  found  the  poems  that  she  should  have destroyed, and he beat her for the first time in their marriage. Her sons tried to  stop  him,  and  Hana,  just  nine  years  old  then,  screamed  and  screamed. 

That  evening,  Nori  threw  her  out,  and  she  made  her  way  to  her  sister’s house.  Later,  the  lawyer  said  it  would  be  pointless  for  her  to  try  to  get

custody of the children since she had no job and no skills. He coughed in what  seemed  like  politeness  or  discomfort  and  said  it  would  also  be pointless because of what she had done. Etsuko nodded and decided to give up her children, thinking that she would not trouble them anymore. Then, following a want ad for a restaurant hostess, Etsuko moved to Yokohama, where she knew no one. 

Etsuko wanted to believe that being with Mozasu was changing her. That she was sexually faithful to him, she took as proof. She had once tried to explain this to her sister, and Mari had replied, “A snake that sheds its skin is still a snake.” And her mother, on hearing that Mozasu wanted to marry her, said, “Honto? To a pachinko Korean? Haven’t you done enough to your poor children? Why not just kill them?” 

The penalties incurred for the mistakes you made had to be paid out in full  to  the  members  of  your  family.  But  she  didn’t  believe  that  she  could ever discharge these sums. 

At noon, Mozasu came to get her. They were going to pick up Solomon at his  school  to  take  him  to  get  his  alien  registration  card.  Koreans  born  in Japan after 1952 had to report to their local ward office on their fourteenth birthday to request permission to stay in Japan. Every three years, Solomon would have to do this again unless he left Japan for good. 

As soon as she got in the car, Mozasu reminded her to put on her seat belt.  Etsuko  was  still  thinking  about  Hana.  Before  she’d  left,  she  had phoned  the  doctor,  and  the  procedure  was  scheduled  for  the  end  of  the week. 

Mozasu took her hand. Etsuko thought his face had strength to it; there was  power  in  his  straight  neck.  She  hadn’t  known  many  Koreans  before him, but she imagined that his squared-off facial features were traditionally Korean—his  wide  jawbone,  straight  white  teeth,  thick  black  hair,  and  the shallow-set, narrow, smiling eyes. He had a lean, slack body that reminded her of metal. When he made love to her, he was serious, almost as if he was angry,  and  she  found  that  this  gave  her  intense  pleasure.  His  physical movements  were  deliberate  and  forceful,  and  she  wanted  to  surrender  to them.  Whenever  she  read  about  something  or  someone  Korean,  she

wondered  what  Korea  was  like.  Mozasu’s  deceased  father,  a  Christian minister,  was  from  the  North,  and  his  mother,  who’d  had  a  confection business, had come from the South. His plainspoken mother was so humble in  her  manner  and  dress  that  she  could  be  mistaken  for  a  modest housekeeper rather than the mother of a millionaire pachinko parlor owner. 

Mozasu was holding a wrapped present, the size of a block of tofu. She recognized the silver foil paper from his favorite jewelry store. 

“Is that for Solomon?” 

“No. It’s for you.” 

“Ehh? Why?” 

It was a gold-and-diamond watch nestled in a dark red velvet box. 

“It’s a mistress watch. I bought it last week, and I showed it to Kuboda-san, the new night floor manager, and he said that these fancy watches are what  you  give  to  your  mistress  because  they  cost  the  same  as  a  diamond ring  but  you  can’t  give  a  ring  to  your  mistress  since  you’re  already married.” 

He raised his eyebrows with amusement. 

Etsuko  checked  to  see  if  the  glass  partition  separating  them  from  the driver was closed all the way; it was. Her skin flushed with heat. 

“Make him stop the car.” 

“What’s the matter?” 

Etsuko  pulled  her  hand  away.  She  wanted  to  say  that  she  wasn’t  his mistress, but instead, she burst into tears. 

“Why? Why are you crying? Every year for the past three years, I bring you a diamond ring—each one bigger than the one before it—and you say no to me. I go back to the jeweler, and he and I have to get drunk. Nothing has changed for me.” He sighed. “You are the one who says no. Refuses the pachinko yakuza.” 

“You’re not yakuza.” 

“I am not yakuza. But everyone thinks Koreans are gangsters.” 

“None of that matters to me. It’s my family.” 

Mozasu  looked  out  the  window,  and  when  he  spotted  his  son,  Mozasu waved at him. 

The car stopped, and Solomon got in the front passenger seat. The glass partition opened, and he stuck his head through to say hi. Etsuko reached over to straighten the rumpled collar of his white dress shirt. 

“Arigato  very  much,”  he  said.  They  often  mixed  up  words  in  different languages  as  a  joke.  He  dropped  back  into  his  seat  and  closed  the  glass partition so he could talk with the driver, Yamamoto-san, about the previous night’s  Tigers  game.  The  Tigers  had  an  American  manager  this  year,  and Solomon was hopeful for the season. Yamamoto was not so optimistic. 

Mozasu picked up her left wrist gently and clasped the watch on it. 

“You’re  a  funny  woman.  I  bought  you  a  gift.  Just  say  thanks.  I  never meant that you were a—” 

The  bridge  of  her  nose  hurt,  and  she  thought  she  would  start  crying again. 

“Hana called. She’s coming to Yokohama. Today.” 

“Is she okay?” He looked surprised. 

Etsuko went to Hokkaido twice yearly to see her children. Mozasu had never met them. 

“Maybe she can go to Solomon’s party. See the famous singer,” Mozasu said. 

“I don’t know if she likes Hiromi-san,” she replied. Etsuko had no idea if Hana  liked  pop  music.  As  a  child,  she  hadn’t  been  the  kind  who  sang  or danced.  Etsuko  stared  at  the  back  of  the  driver’s  gray-streaked  head.  The driver  nodded  thoughtfully  while  Solomon  talked  to  him,  and  their  quiet gestures appeared intimate. She wished she had something like baseball that she  could  talk  about  with  her  daughter—a  safe  subject  they  could  visit without subtext or aggression. 

Etsuko  told  Mozasu  that  Hana  had  an  appointment  with  a  doctor  in Yokohama. When he asked if she was sick, she shook her head no. 

This  was  how  life  had  turned  out.  Her  oldest,  Tatsuo,  was  twenty-five years old, and it was taking him eight years to graduate from a fourth-rate college. Her second son, Tari, a withdrawn nineteen-year-old, had failed his college  entrance  exams  and  was  working  as  a  ticket  collector  at  a  movie theater.  She  had  no  right  to  expect  her  children  to  hold  the  aspirations  of other  middle-class  people—to  graduate  from  Tokyo  University,  to  get  a desk job at the Industrial Bank of Japan, to marry into a nice family. She had made them into village outcasts, and there was no way for them to be acceptable anymore. 

Etsuko unclasped the watch and put it back in the velvet case. She laid it down in the space between them on the white, starched doily covering the

black leather seats. He handed it back to her. 

“It’s not a ring. Save me a trip to the jeweler.” 

Etsuko  held  the  watch  case  in  her  hands  and  wondered  how  they’d stayed together with him not giving up and her not giving in. 

The Yokohama ward office was a giant gray box with an obscure sign. The first clerk they saw was a tall man with a narrow face and a shock of black hair  buzzed  off  at  the  sides.  He  stared  at  Etsuko  shamelessly,  his  eyes darting across her breasts, hips, and jeweled fingers. She was overdressed compared  to  Mozasu  and  Solomon,  who  wore  white  dress  shirts,  dark slacks,  and  black  dress  shoes.  They  looked  like  the  gentle  Mormon missionaries who used to glide through her village on their bicycles when she was a girl. 

“Your  name—”  The  clerk  squinted  his  eyes  at  the  form  Solomon  was filling out. “So-ro-mo-n. What kind of name is that?” 

“It’s from the Bible. He was a king. The son of King David. A man of great wisdom. My great-uncle named me.” The boy smiled at the clerk as if he was sharing a secret. He was a polite boy, but because he had gone to school  with  Americans  and  other  kinds  of  foreigners  at  his  international schools, he sometimes said things that a Japanese person would never have said. 

“So-ro-mo-n, a king. Great wisdom.” The clerk smirked. “Koreans don’t have kings anymore.” 

“What did you say?” Etsuko asked. 

Quickly, Mozasu pulled her back. 

She glanced at Mozasu. His temper was far worse than hers. Once, when a  restaurant  guest  had  tried  to  make  her  sit  with  him,  Mozasu,  who happened  to  be  there  that  night,  walked  over,  picked  him  up  bodily,  and threw  him  outside  the  restaurant,  breaking  the  man’s  ribs.  She  was expecting no less of a reaction now, but Mozasu averted his eyes from the clerk and stared at Solomon’s right hand. 

Mozasu smiled. 

“Excuse me, sir,” he said with no trace of irritation or anger. “We’re in a hurry to return home, because it’s the boy’s birthday. Is there anything else

we  should  do?”  Mozasu  folded  his  hands  behind  him.  “Thank  you  very much for understanding.” 

Confused,  Solomon  turned  to  Etsuko,  and  she  flashed  him  a  warning look. 

The clerk pointed to the back of the room and told Mozasu and Etsuko to sit. Solomon remained standing opposite the clerk. In the long, rectangular room,  shaped  like  a  train  car,  with  bank  teller  windows  running  parallel along  opposite  walls,  half  a  dozen  people  sat  on  benches,  reading  their newspapers  or  manga.  Etsuko  wondered  if  they  were  Korean.  From  their seats, Etsuko and Mozasu could see Solomon talking to the clerk, but they couldn’t hear anything. 

Mozasu sat down, then got up again. He asked if she wanted a can of tea from the vending machine, and she nodded yes. She felt like slapping the clerk’s face. In middle school, she had once slapped a bossy girl, and it had been satisfying. 

When Mozasu returned with their tea, she thanked him. 

“You must have known—” She paused. “You must have warned him. I mean, you told him that today would not be so easy?” She didn’t mean to be critical, but after the words came from her mouth, they sounded harsh, and she was sorry. 

“No.  I  didn’t  say  anything  to  him.”  He  opened  and  closed  his  fists rhythmically. “I came here with my mother and brother, Noa, for my first registration  papers.  The  clerk  was  normal.  Nice  even.  So  I  asked  you  to come.  I  thought  maybe  having  a  woman  by  him  might  help.”  He  exhaled through his nostrils. “It was stupid to wish for kindness.” 

“No.  No.  You  couldn’t  have  warned  him.  I  shouldn’t  have  said  it  like that.” 

“It  is  hopeless.  I  cannot  change  his  fate.  He  is  Korean.  He  has  to  get those papers, and he has to follow all the steps of the law perfectly. Once, at a ward office, a clerk told me that I was a guest in his country.” 

“You and Solomon were born here.” 

“Yes,  my  brother,  Noa,  was  born  here,  too.  And  now  he  is  dead.” 

Mozasu covered his face with his hands. 

Etsuko sighed. 

“Anyway, the clerk was not wrong. And this is something Solomon must understand.  We  can  be  deported.  We  have  no  motherland.  Life  is  full  of

things he cannot control so he must adapt. My boy has to survive.” 

Solomon  returned  to  them.  Next  he  had  his  photograph  taken,  and afterward,  he  had  to  go  to  another  room  to  get  fingerprinted.  Then  they could go home. The last clerk was a plump woman; her light green uniform flattened  her  large  breasts  and  round  shoulders.  She  took  Solomon’s  left index  finger  and  gently  dipped  it  into  the  pot  filled  with  thick  black  ink. 

Solomon  depressed  his  finger  onto  a  white  card  as  if  he  were  a  child painting. Mozasu looked away and sighed audibly. The clerk smiled at the boy and told him to pick up the registration card in the next room. 

“Let’s get your dog tags,” Mozasu said. 

Solomon faced his father. “Hmm?” 

“It’s what we dogs must have.” 

The clerk looked furious suddenly. 

“The  fingerprints  and  registration  cards  are  vitally  important  for government  records.  There’s  no  need  to  feel  insulted  by  this.  It  is  an immigration regulation required for foreign—” 

Etsuko  stepped  forward.  “But  you  don’t  make  your  children  get fingerprinted on their birthday, do you?” 

The clerk’s neck reddened. 

“My son is dead.” 

Etsuko bit her lip. She didn’t want to feel anything for the woman, but she  knew  what  it  was  like  to  lose  your  children—it  was  like  you  were cursed and nothing would ever restore the desolation of your life. 

“Koreans  do  lots  of  good  for  this  country,”  Etsuko  said.  “They  do  the difficult  jobs  Japanese  don’t  want  to  do;  they  pay  taxes,  obey  laws,  raise good families, and create jobs—” 

The clerk nodded sympathetically. 

“You Koreans always tell me that.” 

Solomon blurted out, “She’s not Korean.” 

Etsuko touched his arm, and the three of them walked out of the airless room. She wanted to crawl out of the gray box and see the light of outdoors again.  She  longed  for  the  white  mountains  of  Hokkaido.  And  though  she had never done so in her childhood, she wanted to walk in the cold, snowy

forests beneath the flanks of dark, leafless trees. In life, there was so much insult and injury, and she had no choice but to collect what was hers. But now she wished to take Solomon’s shame, too, and add it to her pile, though she was already overwhelmed. 

10

One of her mother’s waitresses had brought her a Coke, and Hana was sitting at a table near the bar, playing with the straw. No longer permed, her hair  was  straight  and  its  natural  color,  a  reddish  black.  It  was  cut  in  one even  length  and  splayed  across  her  small  shoulders.  She  wore  a  neatly ironed,  white  cotton  blouse  and  a  dark  pleated  skirt  coming  to  her  knees, with gray wool stockings and flat schoolgirl shoes. She hadn’t dressed like this since she was in primary school. Her stomach was flat, but her bud-like breasts looked fuller; otherwise, there was no way of knowing that she was pregnant. 

Closed for a private event, the restaurant dining room was set up for the party. White linen cloths covered a dozen round tables, and in the middle of each sat an elegant floral arrangement and candlesticks. A busboy stood at the  edge  of  the  room,  blowing  up  one  red  balloon  after  another  with  a helium tank. He let them all float up to the ceiling. 

Etsuko  and  Solomon  entered  the  restaurant  quietly.  He  had  insisted  on coming by the restaurant to say hello to her daughter before heading home to change. At first, his mouth opened in surprise at the decorations and the dramatic  transformation  of  the  room.  Then,  seeing  the  girl  at  the  empty table, he asked, “Is that her?” 

“Yes.” 

Hana smiled shyly at them. 

Solomon  and  Hana  greeted  each  other  formally.  Their  mutual  curiosity was  obvious.  Hana  pointed  to  the  balloons  hiding  the  ceiling,  and  before Etsuko  had  a  chance,  Solomon  replied  quickly  in  Japanese,  “It’s  my birthday. Why don’t you come to the party? There’s going be an American dinner here tonight, and then we’re going to a real disco.” 

Hana answered, “If you wish. I might.” 

Etsuko  frowned.  She  had  to  speak  to  the  chef  about  the  menu,  but  she was reluctant to leave them alone. A few minutes later, when she returned from the kitchen, they were whispering like a pair of young lovers. Etsuko checked  her  watch  and  urged  Solomon  to  get  home.  At  the  door,  he shouted, “Hey, I’ll see you at the party,” and Hana smiled like a courtesan as she waved good-bye. 

“Why did you make him go? I was having fun.” 

“Because he has to get dressed.” 

“I  looked  in  them.”  Hana  glanced  at  the  bags  near  the  entrance.  There were a hundred party bags in four long rows that had to be transported to the  disco—each  bag  filled  with  tapes,  a  Sony  Walkman  cassette  player, imported teen magazines, and boxed chocolates. 

“I wish my dad was a yakuza.” 

“Hana,  he’s  not—”  Etsuko  looked  around  to  see  if  anyone  could  hear them. 

“Your boyfriend’s son doesn’t seem like a brat.” 

“He doesn’t have it easy.” 

“Not  easy?  American  private  schools,  millions  in  the  bank,  and  a chauffeur. Get some perspective, Mother.” 

“Today, he had to go to the ward office to request permission to stay in Japan  for  another  three  years.  If  he  was  denied,  he  could  have  been deported. He has to carry around an alien registration card and—” 

“Oh,  really?  But  he  wasn’t  deported,  right?  Now  he  gets  a  fancy  party that’s nicer than most weddings.” 

“He was born in this country, and he had to be fingerprinted today on his birthday  like  he  was  a  criminal.  He’s  just  a  child.  He  didn’t  do  anything wrong.” 

“We’re  all  criminals.  Liars,  thieves,  whores—that’s  who  we  are.”  The girl’s  carbon-colored  eyes  looked  hard  and  ancient.  “No  one  is  innocent here.” 

“Why must you be so hard-hearted?” 

“I’m the only one who still talks to you.” 

“I’ve said I’m sorry enough times.” Etsuko tried to control her voice, but the waitresses heard everything, and suddenly it didn’t matter anymore. 

“I made the appointment.” 

Hana looked up. 

“The  day  after  tomorrow,  we’ll  take  care  of  your  problem.”  Etsuko looked  straight  at  her  daughter’s  pale,  angry  face.  “You  shouldn’t  be  a mother. You have no idea how hard it is to have children.” 

The  steady  line  of  Hana’s  lips  crumpled,  and  she  covered  her  manga-pretty face with her hands and began to cry. 

Etsuko  didn’t  know  if  she  should  say  something.  Instead,  she  put  her hand on her daughter’s head. Hana winced, but Etsuko didn’t immediately pull her hand back. It had been so long since she had touched her daughter’s satiny hair. 

When  Etsuko  lived  in  the  cramped,  three-bedroom  house  in  Hokkaido with its leaky roof and tiny kitchen, certain labors had sustained her. At this moment,  with  a  kind  of  pinprick  pain,  Etsuko  recalled  watching  her  sons devour the shrimp that she had fried for dinner,  piled high on paper-lined plates. Even in the middle of July, it had been worth it to stand in front of a hot  tempura  pan,  dropping  battered  shrimp  into  bubbling  peanut  oil, because to her sons, Mama’s shrimp was better than candy, they’d said. And it  came  to  her  like  a  tall  and  dark  wave  how  much  she’d  loved  combing Hana’s freshly washed hair when her cheeks were still pink from the steamy bathwater. 

“I know you didn’t want us. My brothers told me, and I told them they were  wrong  even  though  I  knew  they  weren’t.  I  clung  to  you  because  I wasn’t going to let you just leave what you started. How can you tell me how  hard  it  is  to  have  children?  You  haven’t  even  tried  to  be  a  mother. 

What right do you have? What makes you a mother?” 

Etsuko grew silent, utterly transfixed by the realization that how she saw herself was actually how her children saw her, too. They thought she was a monster. 

“How can you think that I didn’t want the three of you?” She recalled all the letters, gifts, and money she’d sent, which the boys had returned. And worse,  the  phone  calls  to  the  house  to  check  on  them  when  her  husband wouldn’t say anything beyond  moshi-moshi, then would hand the phone to Hana  because  she  was  the  only  one  who  would  take  the  receiver.  Etsuko wanted  to  justify  herself—her  numerous  and  repeated  attempts—to  offer proof. Being a mother was what defined her more than any other thing—

more than being a daughter, wife, divorced woman, girlfriend, or restaurant

owner. She hadn’t done it well, but it was who she was, and it was what had changed  her  inside  forever.  From  the  moment  Tatsuo  was  born,  she  had been filled with grief and self-doubt because she was never good enough. 

Even though she had failed, being a mother was eternal; a part of her life wouldn’t end with her death. 

“But,  but,  I  didn’t  marry  Mozasu.  I  don’t  even  live  with  him.  So  I wouldn’t make things worse for you and your brothers.” 

Hana tilted her head back and laughed. 

“Am  I  supposed  to  thank  you  for  this  great  sacrifice?  So  you  didn’t marry  a  Korean  gangster,  and  you  want  me  to  congratulate  you  for  this? 

You  didn’t  marry  him  because  you  didn’t  want  to  suffer.  You’re  the  most selfish person I know. If you want to sleep with him and take his money to set up a fancy place and not marry him, that’s your self-serving choice. You didn’t  do  it  for  me  or  my  brothers.”  Hana  dried  her  face  with  her  shirt sleeve. “You don’t want to be judged. That’s why you haven’t married him. 

That’s why you left Hokkaido to hide out in the big city. You think you’re such a victim, but you’re not. You left because you’re afraid, and you slept with all those men because you were afraid of getting old. You’re weak and pathetic.  Don’t  tell  me  about  sacrifices,  because  I  don’t  believe  in  such crap.” 

Hana started to cry again. 

Etsuko slumped in her chair. If she married Mozasu, it would prove to everyone in Hokkaido that no decent Japanese man would touch a woman like her. She would be called a yakuza wife. If she married him, she’d no longer be considered the tasteful owner of a successful restaurant in the best part of Yokohama—an image she only half believed herself. Mozasu must have thought that she was a better person than she actually was, but Hana wasn’t  fooled.  Etsuko  picked  up  Hana’s  travel  bag  next  to  her  chair  and nudged her daughter to stand up to go. 

Etsuko’s  apartment  was  in  a  luxury  building  four  blocks  from  the restaurant. On the way there, Hana said she didn’t want to go to the party anymore.  She  wanted  to  be  left  alone  so  she  could  sleep  until  morning. 

Etsuko  unlocked  the  front  door  to  her  apartment  and  led  Hana  to  her

bedroom. She would sleep on the sofa tonight. 

Hana lay across the futon, and Etsuko pulled a light comforter over her thin young body and turned out the light. Hana curled into herself; her eyes were  still  open,  and  she  said  nothing.  Etsuko  didn’t  want  to  leave  her. 

Despite  everything,  it  struck  her  that  what  she  was  feeling  was  a  kind  of contentedness.  They  were  together  again.  Hana  had  come  to  her  for  care. 

Etsuko sat down on the edge of the bed and stroked her daughter’s hair. 

“You  have  this  scent,”  Hana  said  quietly,  “I  used  to  think  it  was  your perfume. Joy,  nee?” 

“I still wear that.” 

“I  know,”  Hana  said,  and  Etsuko  resisted  the  urge  to  sniff  her  own wrists. 

“It’s not just the perfume, though, it’s all the other creams and things that you  wear,  and  it  makes  up  this  smell.  I  used  to  walk  around  department stores wondering what it was. The smell of  mama.” 

Etsuko wanted to say many things, but above all that she would try not to make any more mistakes. “Hanako—” 

“I  want  to  go  to  sleep  now.  Go  to  that  boy’s  party.  Leave  me  alone.” 

Hana’s voice was flat but more tender this time. 

Etsuko offered to stay, but Hana waved her away. Etsuko mentioned then that her schedule was open the next day. Maybe they could go and buy a bed  and  a  dresser.  “Then  you  can  always  come  back  and  visit  me.  I  can make up a room for you,” Etsuko said. 

Hana sighed, but her expression was blank. 

Etsuko couldn’t tell what her daughter wanted. “I’m not saying you have to  go.  Especially  after—”  Etsuko  put  her  fingertips  across  her  lips,  then quickly removed them. “You can stay. Start school here even.” 

Hana shifted her head on her pillow and inhaled, still saying nothing. 

“I can call your father. To ask.” 

Hana pulled the blanket up to her chin. “If you want.” 

Etsuko had to go back to the restaurant, but she settled on the sofa for a few minutes. When she had been a young mother there used to be only one time  in  her  waking  hours  when  she’d  felt  a  kind  of  peace,  and  that  was always after her children went to bed for the night. She longed to see her sons as they were back then: their legs chubby and white, their mushroom haircuts  misshapen  because  they  could  never  sit  still  at  the  barber.  She

wished  she  could  take  back  the  times  she  had  scolded  her  children  just because she was tired. There were so many errors. If life allowed revisions, she  would  let  them  stay  in  their  bath  a  little  longer,  read  them  one  more story before bed, and fix them another plate of shrimp. 

11

The children invited to Solomon’s party were the sons and daughters of diplomats,  bankers,  and  wealthy  expatriates  from  America  and  Europe. 

Everyone  spoke  English  rather  than  Japanese.  Mozasu  had  chosen  the international school in Yokohama because he liked the idea of Westerners. 

He  had  specific  ambitions  for  his  son:  Solomon  should  speak  perfect English  as  well  as  perfect  Japanese;  he  should  grow  up  among  worldly, upper-class  people;  and  ultimately,  he  should  work  for  an  American company  in  Tokyo  or  New  York—a  city  Mozasu  had  never  been  to  but imagined as a place where everyone was given a fair shot. He wanted his son to be an international man of the world. 

A line of black limousines snaked along the street. As the children left the restaurant, they thanked Mozasu and Etsuko for the fine dinner they’d eaten. Mozasu lined up the children in front of the restaurant and instructed, 

“Ladies first,” a saying he had picked up from watching American movies. 

The girls trooped into the gleaming cars in sixes and drove away. Then the boys followed. Solomon rode in the last car with his best friends, Nigel, the son of an English banker, and Ajay, the son of an Indian shipping company executive. 

The disco was dimly lit and glamorous. From the high ceiling, twenty or so mirrored balls hung at different heights, flooding the large room with tiny panes  of  light  that  flashed  and  swayed  with  the  movements  of  the  balls. 

They had the effect of making anyone who walked across the floor shimmer like  a  fish  underwater.  After  everyone  arrived  and  sat  down  at  the  lounge tables, the manager, a handsome Filipino, got up on the elevated stage. He

had a beautiful, round voice. 

“Dear  friends  of  Solomon  Baek!  Welcome  to  Ringo’s!”  He  paused  for the children’s cheers. “For Solomon’s birthday fiesta, Ringo’s presents the hottest  star  in  Japan—one  day  the  world:  Ken  Hiromi  and  the  Seven Gentlemen!” 

The children didn’t seem to believe him. The curtain rose to reveal the seven-piece  rock  band,  and  the  singer  emerged  from  the  back.  Hiromi looked  utterly  normal,  almost  disappointingly  so.  He  dressed  like  a businessman who’d forgotten his necktie and wore thick-framed eyeglasses just like the ones on his album covers. His hair was impeccably combed. He couldn’t have been more than thirty. 

Solomon kept shaking his head, bewildered and delighted. The band was loud,  and  the  kids  rushed  to  the  stage  to  dance  wildly.  When  the  long  set ended, the emcee asked everyone to gather around the stage, and Ichiro, the cook, wheeled a spectacular ice cream cake shaped like a baseball diamond toward Solomon. Tall thin candles lit the large surface of the cake. A girl shouted, “Don’t forget to make a wish, baby!” 

In  one  huff,  Solomon  blew  out  the  candles,  and  everyone  clapped  and hollered. 

Etsuko handed him the beribboned knife so he could cut the first slice. A spotlight shone on him as he poised the long, serrated blade over the cake. 

“Do you need help?” she asked. 

“I think I got it,” he said, using both hands to make a straight cut. 

“Oh,” she uttered, seeing the ink under his nails. He’d washed off most of it, but a shadow of the stain remained on his fingertips. 

Solomon looked up from what he was doing and smiled. 

Etsuko  guided  his  arm  lightly  to  return  him  to  his  task.  After  the  first slice, Solomon gave the knife back to her, and she cut the remaining pieces. 

Waiters  passed  out  the  cake,  and  Hiromi,  who  was  sitting  by  himself, accepted a piece. Mozasu gave Solomon a fat blue envelope filled with yen notes  and  told  him  to  give  it  to  the  singer.  Ken  Hiromi  motioned  to Solomon to sit down. In this light, Etsuko thought, no one else would notice the ink. 

The band played another set, then a DJ played popular songs for the kids. 

As the party wound down, Etsuko felt pleasantly exhausted—the way she did  after  the  restaurant  closed.  Mozasu  was  sitting  in  a  booth  drinking champagne  by  himself,  and  she  sat  down  beside  him.  Mozasu  refilled  his glass and handed it to her, and she drank it in two gulps. She laughed. He said she did a good job for Solomon, and Etsuko shook her head. “Iie.” 

Without thinking, she said, “I think she would have been pleased.” 

Mozasu looked confused. A moment later, he nodded. “Yes, she would have been so happy for him.” 

“What  was  she  like?”  Etsuko  shifted  her  body  to  see  his  face.  Little squares of light danced across his sharp features. 

“I’ve told you before. She was a nice lady. Like you.” It was difficult to say any more than that about Yumi. 

“No, tell me something specific about her.” Etsuko wanted to know how they were different, not how they were the same. “I want to know more.” 

“Why?  She  is  dead.”  Mozasu  looked  hurt  after  saying  this.  He  noticed that Solomon was now dancing with a tall Chinese girl with short hair. His forehead  glistened  with  sweat  as  he  followed  the  girl’s  elegant  moves. 

Etsuko stared into her empty champagne glass. 

“She  wanted  to  name  him  Sejong,”  he  said.  “But  it’s  tradition  for  the husband’s  father  to  name  the  grandson.  My  father’s  dead  so  my  Uncle Yoseb named him Solomon.” He paused. “Sejong was a king in Korea. He invented  the  Korean  alphabet.  Uncle  Yoseb  gave  him  the  name  of  a  king from the Bible instead. I think he did it because my father was a minister.” 

He smiled. 

“Why are you smiling?” 

“Because Yumi”—Mozasu said her name out loud, and it surprised him to hear the sound of the two syllables—“was so proud of him. Her son. She wanted to give him the life of a king. She was like my father and uncle, I think. Proud. She was proud of me and my work. It was nice. But now that I’m older, I wonder why.” Mozasu sounded wistful. “What do we Koreans have to be so proud of?” 

“It’s good to be proud of your children.” She smoothed down her skirt. 

When her children had been born, what she had felt was amazement at their physical  perfection.  She  had  marveled  at  their  miniature  human  form  and their good health. But not once did she consider a name taken from history

—the  name  of  a  king.  She  had  never  been  proud  of  her  family  or  her country; if anything, she was ashamed. 

“One of those girls came up to me today and said Solomon looked like his mother.” He pointed to a cluster of girls in the corner of the room. They wore bandeau tops and jersey skirts clinging to their thin hips. 

“How could she know that?” 

“She meant you.” 

“Oh.” Etsuko nodded. “I wish I was his mother.” 

“No.  No,  you  don’t.”  Mozasu  said  this  calmly,  and  she  felt  like  she deserved that. 

“I’m no better than that woman clerk this afternoon,  nee?” 

Mozasu shook his head and placed his hand over hers. 

Why  did  her  family  think  pachinko  was  so  terrible?  Her  father,  a traveling  salesman,  had  sold  expensive  life  insurance  policies  to  isolated housewives  who  couldn’t  afford  them,  and  Mozasu  created  spaces  where grown men and women could play pinball for money. Both men had made money  from  chance  and  fear  and  loneliness.  Every  morning,  Mozasu  and his men tinkered with the machines to fix the outcomes—there could only be a few winners and a lot of losers. And yet we played on, because we had hope that we might be the lucky ones. How could you get angry at the ones who wanted to be in the game? Etsuko had failed in this important way—

she  had  not  taught  her  children  to  hope,  to  believe  in  the  perhaps-absurd possibility that they might win. Pachinko was a foolish game, but life was not. 

Etsuko  removed  her  new  watch  and  put  it  in  his  hand.  “It’s  not  that  I don’t want a ring—” 

Mozasu didn’t look at her, but he put the watch in his pocket. 

“It’s  late.  Almost  midnight,”  he  said  gently.  “The  children  have  to  get home.” 

Etsuko rose from the table and went to hand out the party bags. 

Not wanting the evening to end, Solomon claimed that he was hungry, so the three of them returned to her restaurant. The place was clean again and looked open for business. 

“A little bit of everything,” he said when she asked him what he wanted to eat. He looked so happy, and it pleased her to see him like this. She could count on him to be a happy person. Maybe that was what Solomon was for her and Mozasu. 

At the very back of the dining room, Mozasu sat down at a table for four and  opened  his  evening-edition  newspaper.  He  looked  like  a  middle-aged man  waiting  calmly  for  his  train  to  arrive.  Etsuko  headed  for  the  kitchen with Solomon trailing her. 

She  put  down  three  white  plates  on  the  prep  counter.  From  the refrigerator, she pulled out the tray of fried chicken and the bowl of potato salad—dishes that Ichiro had made following an American cookbook. 

“Why didn’t Hana come? Is she sick?” 

“No.” Etsuko didn’t like to lie to a direct question. 

“She’s pretty, you know.” 

“Too  pretty.  That’s  her  problem.”  Her  own  mother  had  once  said  this about her when a family friend had complimented Etsuko. 

“Did you have fun tonight?” she asked. 

“Yeah. I still can’t believe it. Hiromi-san talked to me.” 

“What did he say?” She put two large pieces of chicken on Mozasu’s and Solomon’s plates and a small drumstick on hers. “Was he nice?” 

“Very nice and cool. He said his best friends are Korean. He told me to be good to my parents.” 

Solomon hadn’t denied her as his mother, and though this should have been a nice thing, it only made her feel more anxious. 

“Your father told me tonight that your mother was proud of you. From the moment you were born.” 

Solomon said nothing. 

She didn’t think that he should need a mother anymore; he was already grown  up,  and  he  was  doing  better  than  most  kids  she  knew  who  had mothers who were alive. He was almost a man. 

“Come to the sink. Hold out your left hand.” 

“A present?” 

She laughed and put his left hand over the sink basin and turned on the faucet. “There’s still ink left.” 

“Can they make me leave? Really deport me?” 

“Everything went well today,” she replied, and softly scrubbed the pads

of  his  fingers  and  nails  with  a  dishwashing  brush.  “There’s  no  need  to worry, Solomon-chan.” 

He seemed satisfied with her answer. 

“Hana told me she came to Yokohama to get rid of her little problem. Is she  pregnant?  Nigel  got  his  girlfriend  pregnant,  and  she  had  to  get  an abortion.” 

“Your friend Nigel?” She remembered the blond-haired boy who played Atari with him on the weekends. He was only a year older than Solomon. 

He nodded. “Yup. Hana seems great.” 

“My children hate me.” 

Solomon picked at the ink beneath his fingernails. “Your kids hate you because you’re gone.” His face grew serious. “They can’t help it. They miss you.” 

Etsuko bit the inside of her lower lip. She could feel the small muscles inside  her  mouth,  and  she  stopped  herself  from  drawing  blood.  She  was afraid to look at his face, and though she had tried to restrain herself, she burst into tears. 

“Why?  Why  are  you  crying?”  he  asked.  “I’m  sorry.”  Solomon’s  eyes welled up. 

She inhaled to calm her breathing. 

“When  Hana  was  born,  the  nurses  put  her  footprints  on  a  card.  They washed the ink off, but not very well, so when I went home I had to get it off. I don’t think she could see anything really, because she was just born, but  I  felt  like  she  was  looking  at  me  like  I  was  hurting  her,  and  she  just cried and cried—” 

“Etsuko-chan, Hana will be okay. Nigel’s girlfriend is fine. They might get married after college. That’s what he said—” 

“No, no. It’s not that. I’m just so sorry that you might have thought that I didn’t want to be your mother.” She clutched her stomach, and she tried to regulate her breath. “I’ve hurt so many people. And you’re such a good boy, Solomon. I wish I could take credit for you.” 

His dark, straight hair clung to the sides of his face, and he didn’t brush it away. His eyes strained with worry. 

“But I was born today, and isn’t it funny how no one gets to remember that  moment  and  who  was  there?  It’s  all  what’s  told  to  you.  You’re  here now. You are a mother to me.” 

Etsuko  covered  her  mouth  with  her  open  palm  and  let  his  words  go through her. Somewhere after being sorry, there had to be another day, and even after a conviction, there could be good in the judgment. At last, Etsuko shut off the water and put down the swollen yellow sponge in the sink. The curved  brass  spout  let  go  its  last  few  drops,  and  the  kitchen  grew  silent. 

Etsuko reached over to hold the child on his birthday. 

12

Osaka, 1979

Sunja had left her son and grandson Solomon in Yokohama and returned to  Osaka  when  she  learned  that  her  mother,  Yangjin,  had  stomach  cancer. 

Through  fall  and  winter,  Sunja  slept  at  the  foot  of  her  mother’s  pallet  to relieve  her  exhausted  sister-in-law,  Kyunghee,  who  had  been  nursing Yangjin faithfully after her own husband, Yoseb, finally died. 

Yangjin  lived  on  her  thick  cotton  pallet,  more  or  less  immobile,  in  the front room, which had effectively become her bedroom. The largest room in the  house  smelled  of  eucalyptus  and  tangerines.  The  floor  had  been  lined recently  with  fresh  tatami  mats,  and  a  double  row  of  greenery  in  ceramic pots  flourished  by  the  two  sparkling  windows.  The  large  basket  by  the pallet, filled to the brim with Kyushu tangerines—a costly gift from fellow parishioners at the Korean church in Osaka—released a glorious scent. The new  Sony  color  television  was  on,  its  volume  low,  as  the  three  women waited to watch Yangjin’s favorite program,  Other Lands. 

Sunja sat on the floor beside her mother, who was sitting up as well as she could, and Kyunghee remained at her usual place on the other side of the  pallet  by  Yangjin’s  head.  Both  Sunja  and  Kyunghee  were  knitting sections of a navy woolen sweater for Solomon. 

Strangely, as Yangjin’s limbs and joints quit, one after the other, and as her  muscles  softened  into  jelly,  her  mind  felt  clearer  and  more  free.  She could imagine leaving her body to run swiftly like a deer. Yet in life, she

could  hardly  move  at  all;  she  could  barely  eat  anything  recognizable  as food. Nevertheless, the unexpected dividend of this illness was that for the first  time  in  her  life,  perhaps  since  the  moment  she  was  able  to  walk  and perform any chores, Yangjin felt no compulsion to labor. It was no longer possible to cook meals, wash dishes, sweep the floors, sew clothing, scrub toilets, tend to the children, do laundry, make food to sell, or do whatever else needed doing. Her job was to rest before dying. All she had to do was nothing at all. At best, she had a few days left. 

Yangjin wasn’t sure what happened after this was over—but she felt she would go home either to all those who had died before or to  Yesu Kuristo and his kingdom. She wanted to see her husband, Hoonie, again; once, in church, she’d heard a sermon that said that in heaven, the lame could walk and the blind could see. Her husband had opposed the idea of God, but she hoped that if there was a God, He would understand that Hoonie was a good man who had endured enough with the restrictions of his body and deserved to  be  well.  Whenever  Yangjin  tried  to  talk  about  dying,  Kyunghee  and Sunja would change the subject. 

“So did you send the money to Solomon?” Yangjin asked. “I wanted you to send crisp, new bills from the bank.” 

“Yes, I sent it yesterday,” Sunja replied, adjusting her mother’s pillow so she could see the monitor better. 

“When will he get it? I haven’t heard from him.” 

“Umma, he’ll get the card tonight or tomorrow.” 

Solomon hadn’t phoned to speak to his great-grandmother this week, but that  was  understandable.  He  had  just  had  a  big  birthday  party,  and  Sunja was  the  one  who  would  have  reminded  him  to  write  a  letter  or  to  phone someone to say thank you or just to check in on them. “He’s probably busy with school. I’ll phone later.” 

“So  is  the  singer  really  a  famous  talent?”  Yangjin  asked.  Mozasu  had furnished  the  house  and  provided  for  their  upkeep  ever  since  the  women closed  their  confection  business;  it  was  still  difficult  for  Yangjin  to  grasp that her grandson Mozasu could have so much money that he could hire pop stars for his son’s birthday party. 

“That must be so expensive! Is he really a celebrity?” 

“Well,  that’s  what  Etsuko  said.”  Sunja  was  also  curious  as  to  how Solomon was faring; he would have had to get his identification card for the

first time. She had been worried about that. 

The show came on, and Kyunghee bolted up to adjust the antenna. The picture improved. The familiar Japanese folk music for the program drifted into the room. 

“Where will Higuchi-san go today?” Yangjin smiled broadly. 

In  Other Lands, the interviewer Higuchi-san, a spry, ageless woman with dyed black hair, traveled all over the globe and interviewed Japanese people who  had  immigrated  to  other  lands.  The  interviewer  was  no  ordinary woman of her generation; she was unmarried, childless, and a skilled world-traveling journalist who could ask any intimate question. She was reputed to  have  Korean  blood,  and  the  rumor  alone  was  enough  for  Yangjin  and Kyunghee to find Higuchi-san’s pluck and wanderlust relatable. They were devoted to her. When the women still ran their little confection shop, they’d rush straight home as soon as they closed to avoid missing even a minute of the program. Sunja had never been interested in the show, but now she sat through it for her mother’s sake. 

“Pillows!” Yangjin cried, and Sunja fixed them. 

Kyunghee  clapped  her  hands  as  the  opening  credits  rolled.  Despite  all the restrictions, she had always hoped that Higuchi-san could somehow go to North Korea. Koh Hansu had told her husband that her parents and in-laws  were  dead,  yet  she  still  yearned  to  hear  news  of  home.  Also,  she wanted to know if Kim Changho was safe. No matter how many sad stories she heard from the others whose family members had gone back, she could not  imagine  that  the  handsome  young  man  with  the  thick  eyeglasses  had died. 

As the opening music faded, a disembodied male voice announced that today, Higuchi-san was in Medellín to meet an impressive farming family who  now  owned  the  largest  chicken  farm  in  Colombia.  Higuchi-san, wearing a light-colored raincoat and her famous green  boshi, marveled how the Wakamura family had decided to migrate to Latin America at the end of the  nineteenth  century  and  how  well  they  had  raised  their  children  to  be good Japanese in the world. “Minna nihongo hanase-masu!” Higuchi-san’s voice was full of wonder and admiration. 

The camera zoomed in on Señora Wakamura, the surviving matriarch, a tiny,  wrinkled  woman  who  looked  far  older  than  her  actual  age  of  sixty-seven. Her large, sloping eyes, buried beneath layers of crepey, folded skin, 

appeared wise and thoughtful. Like her siblings, she was born in Medellín. 

“Things were very difficult for my parents, of course. They didn’t speak Spanish  and  didn’t  know  anything  about  chickens.  Father  died  of  a  heart attack when I was six, then Mother raised us by herself. My oldest brother stayed  here  with  our  mother,  but  our  other  two  brothers  went  to  study  in Montreal, then returned. My sisters and I worked on the farm.” 

“That  must  have  been  difficult,  difficult  work,”  Higuchi-san  exclaimed breathlessly. 

“A woman’s lot is to suffer,” Señora Wakamura said. 

“Soo,   soo.” 

The camera panned to show the interior of the cavernous farm, a moving sea  of  white  feathers  comprised  of  tens  of  thousands  of  fluffy  chickens; brilliant red combs streaked the pale, fluttering mass. 

At Higuchi-san’s behest, Señora Wakamura listed the number of chores that she’d had since she was tall enough to sprinkle chicken feed and avoid getting pecked. 

“How very hard all this must have been,” Higuchi-san repeated, trying not to wince from the noxious odors. 

Señora Wakamura shrugged. Her stoicism was undeniable as she showed all  the  moving  parts  of  a  working  chicken  farm,  including  lifting  heavy machinery while trudging through muddy fields. 

At  the  end  of  the  thirty-minute  program,  Higuchi-san  asked  Señora Wakamura to say something to the viewers in Japanese. 

The woman farmer with the ancient face turned to the camera shyly, then looked away like she was thinking. 

“I have never been to Japan”—she frowned—“but I hope that wherever I am  in  life  and  whatever  I  do,  I  can  be  a  good  Japanese.  I  hope  to  never bring shame to my people.” 

Higuchi-san grew teary and signed off. As the closing credits rolled, the announcer said that Higuchi-san was now heading to the airport to reach the next  destination  of   Other  Lands.  “Till  we  countrymen  meet  again!”  the announcer said brightly. 

Sunja  got  up  and  turned  off  the  television.  She  wanted  to  head  to  the kitchen to boil some water for tea. 

“Go-saeng,” Yangjin said out loud. “A woman’s lot is to suffer.” 

“Yes,  go-saeng.” Kyunghee nodded, repeating the word for suffering. 

All her life, Sunja had heard this sentiment from other women, that they must  suffer—suffer  as  a  girl,  suffer  as  a  wife,  suffer  as  a  mother—die suffering.  Go-saeng—the word made her sick. What else was there besides this?  She  had  suffered  to  create  a  better  life  for  Noa,  and  yet  it  was  not enough. Should she have taught her son to suffer the humiliation that she’d drunk like water? In the end, he had refused to suffer the conditions of his birth. Did mothers fail by not telling their sons that suffering would come? 

“You’re upset about Noa,” Yangjin said, “I know. He’s all that you ever think  about.  First  it  was  Koh  Hansu,  and  now  it’s  Noa.  You’re  suffering because you wanted that terrible man. A woman can’t make a mistake like that.” 

“What  else  should  I  have  done?”  Sunja  blurted  out,  then  immediately regretted doing so. 

Yangjin shrugged, almost in comic imitation of the woman farmer. “You brought shame on your child by having that man as his father. You caused your  own  suffering.  Noa,  that  poor  boy,  came  from  a  bad  seed.  You’re fortunate  that  Isak  married  you.  What  a  blessing  that  man  was.  Mozasu came from better blood. That’s why he’s so blessed in his work.” 

Sunja  covered  her  mouth  using  both  hands.  It  was  said  often  that  old women  talked  too  much  and  said  useless  things,  but  it  seemed  like  her mother had been storing these specific thoughts in reserve for her. This was like  some  sort  of  mean  inheritance  her  mother  had  been  planning  to  give her. Sunja couldn’t fight her. What was the point? 

Yangjin pursed her lips, then inhaled deeply through her nostrils. 

“That man was bad.” 

“Umma, he brought you here. If he hadn’t brought you—” 

“That’s true that he brought me here, but he was still awful. You can’t change that. That poor boy didn’t have a chance,” Yangjin said. 

“If Noa didn’t have a chance, then why did I suffer? Why should I have even tried? If I’m so foolish, if I made such unforgivable mistakes, is that your fault?” Sunja asked. “I don’t, I don’t…I won’t blame you.” 

Kyunghee  looked  at  Yangjin  imploringly,  but  the  old  woman  seemed oblivious to her silent pleas. 

“Sister,” Kyunghee said gently. “May I get you something? To drink?” 

“No.” Yangjin turned to Sunja, pointing to Kyunghee. “She’s been better to me than my own family. She cares more about me than you do. You just

care about Noa and Mozasu. You only came back when you learned that I was  going  to  die.  You  don’t  care  about  me.  You  don’t  care  about  anyone else except your children.” Yangjin bawled. 

Kyunghee touched Yangjin’s arm gently. 

“Sister, this is not what you mean. Sunja had to take care of Solomon. 

You know that. You said it yourself so many times. And Mozasu needed his mother’s  help  after  Yumi  died,”  she  said  quietly.  “Sunja  has  suffered  so much.  Especially  after  Noa—”  Kyunghee  could  barely  say  Noa’s  name. 

“And  you,  you  have  had  whatever  you  needed  here,  right?”  She  tried  to sound as soothing as possible. 

“Yes, yes, you have always done your best for me. I wish Kim Changho could  have  stayed  in  Japan.  Then  he  could  have  married  you  after  your husband died. I worry that after I die who will take care of you. Sunja-ya, you must take care of Kyunghee. She can’t stay here by herself.  Aigoo, if only  Kim  Changho  hadn’t  rushed  off  to  the  North  and  probably  gotten himself killed.  Aigoo. The poor man probably died for nothing.” 

Kyunghee crumpled visibly. 

“Umma, your medicine is making you say crazy things,” Sunja said. 

“Kim  Changho  only  went  to  Korea  because  he  couldn’t  marry  our Kyunghee, and he couldn’t suffer any more waiting,” Yangjin said, having stopped  crying.  It  was  like  watching  a  toddler  whose  tears  could  stop  at will.  “He  was  much  nicer  than  Yoseb.  After  his  accident,  Yoseb  was  a drunk, but Kim Changho was a real man. He would’ve made our wonderful Kyunghee happy, but he’s dead. Poor Kim Changho. Poor Kyunghee.” 

Seeing Kyunghee’s shocked expression, Sunja said firmly, “Umma, you should  go  to  sleep.  We’re  going  to  leave  you  to  rest.  You  must  be  tired. 

Come  on,  let’s  go  to  the  back  room  and  finish  the  knitting,”  Sunja  said, helping Kyunghee up. At the door, Sunja turned out the light. 

“I’m  not  tired!  You’re  going  to  leave  again,  are  you?  When  things  get difficult, it’s easy to leave. Fine. I’ll die now, then you won’t have to stay here,  and  you  can  rush  back  to  your  precious  Mozasu!  I  never  created  a burden  for  you  one  single  day  of  my  life.  Until  I  couldn’t  move,  every minute I have been here, I have worked to support myself. I never took a yen above what I needed to eat and to put a roof over our heads. I always held up my share, you know. I raised you when your kindhearted father died

—”  At  the  mention  of  her  husband,  Yangjin  began  to  cry  again,  and

Kyunghee rushed to her, unable to watch her being so miserable. 

Sunja watched Kyunghee pat her mother gently until she quieted down. 

Her mother was unrecognizable to her; it would have been easy to say that the  illness  had  changed  her,  but  it  wasn’t  so  simple,  was  it?  Illness  and dying  had  revealed  her  mother’s  truer  thoughts,  the  ones  her  mother  had been  protecting  her  from.  Sunja  had  made  a  mistake;  however,  she  didn’t believe that her son came from a bad seed. The Japanese said that Koreans had too much anger and heat in their blood. Seeds, blood. How could you fight such hopeless ideas? Noa had been a sensitive child who had believed that if he followed all the rules and was the best, then somehow the hostile world would change its mind. His death may have been her fault for having allowed him to believe in such cruel ideals. 

Sunja knelt at her mother’s pallet. 

“I’m  sorry,  umma.  I’m  sorry.  I’m  sorry  I  was  away.  I’m  sorry  about everything.” 

The old woman looked weakly at her only child, hating herself suddenly. 

Yangjin  wanted  to  say  she  was  sorry,  too,  but  strength  passed  from  her body, forcing her to close her eyes. 

13

You’re not a Christian, are you?” Hana asked Solomon. She was sitting next to him in the pew. The minister had just finished eulogizing his great-grandmother,  and  the  organist  began  to  play  “What  a  Friend  We  Have  in Jesus.” The funeral service would end after the song and a closing prayer. 

Solomon tried to shush Hana politely, but as ever, she was persistent. 

“It’s  like  a  cult,  nee?  But  you  don’t  do  anything  interesting  like  get naked outdoors in a group or sacrifice babies? I read that people in America do  things  like  that  if  they  are  serious  Christians.  But  you  don’t  seem  like one  of  those.  You  probably  have  to  give  lots  of  your  money  away  since you’re rich, right?” 

Hana was whispering to him in Japanese with her lips close to his ear, and  Solomon  made  a  serious  face  like  he  was  trying  to  concentrate.  He could smell her strawberry lip gloss. 

He  didn’t  know  how  to  reply.  Some  Japanese  did  believe  that Christianity was a cult. His friends at school who were foreigners didn’t see it this way, but he didn’t know many Japanese who were Christians. 

Hana  poked  him  in  the  ribs  with  her  left  pinkie  finger  while  looking straight ahead at the choir. 

The choir was singing his great-grandmother’s favorite hymn. She used to hum it often. 

Like  everyone  in  his  family,  Solomon  was  a  Christian.  His  paternal grandfather, Baek Isak, had been one of the early Presbyterian ministers in Osaka.  When  Solomon  was  growing  up,  people  at  church  referred  to  his grandfather as a martyr because he had been jailed for his faith and had died upon his release. Sunja, Mozasu, and Solomon went to service each Sunday. 

“It’s  almost  over,  nee?  I  need  a  beer,  Solomon.  Let’s  go?  I’ve  been  a

good girl, and I sat through the whole thing.” 

“Hana,  she  was  my  great-grandmother,”  he  said  at  last.  Solomon remembered  her  as  a  gentle  old  woman  who  smelled  like  orange  oil  and biscuits.  She  didn’t  speak  much  Japanese  but  always  had  treats  and  coins for him in her dark blue vest pockets. 

“We should be more respectful.” 

“Great-granny  is  now  in  heaven.  Isn’t  that  what  Christians  say?”  Hana mimicked a peaceful face. 

“Still, she’s dead.” 

“Well, you don’t seem very upset. Your grandmother Sunja doesn’t seem very sad,” she whispered. “Anyway, you’re a Christian, right?” 

“Yeah, I am a Christian. Why do you care so much?” 

“I want to know what happens after you die. What happens to babies that die?” 

Solomon didn’t know what to say. 

After her abortion, Hana had moved in with her mother. She’d refused to go back to Hokkaido and spent her days hanging out at Etsuko’s restaurant, bored  and  irritated  by  everything.  She  couldn’t  handle  the  English  at Solomon’s school, and she hated kids her own age and refused to go to the local high school. Etsuko was trying to figure out what Hana should do, but in  the  meantime,  Hana  had  decided  that  Solomon  was  her  project  and followed him around at every opportunity. 

Like everyone else, Solomon thought that Hana was exceptionally pretty, but  Etsuko  warned  him  that  her  daughter  was  a  troublemaker  and  that  he should befriend girls from his school. 

“Finally!  The  prayer  is  over.  Come  on,  we  can  get  out  now  before  the exits clog up.” Hana elbowed him gently, then pulled him out of his chair, and he let her lead him out of the building. 

In the brightly lit alley behind the church, Hana leaned backward with one foot remaining on the ground and the other leg bent against the wall. She was smoking a cigarette. Again, she asked him why they couldn’t get beers. 

There  were  kids  at  his  school  who  drank,  but  Solomon  didn’t  like  the taste much, and his friends invariably got in trouble when drunk. His father

wouldn’t have gotten mad at him for stuff like that, and in a way, Solomon felt free to say no to his friends at parties because it wasn’t a big deal. But it was difficult to say no to Hana, because she was relentless when it came to what she wanted. Hana already thought he was too square. 

Hana inhaled her cigarette deeply, making a lovely pout as she exhaled. 

“No beer. Respects his great-grandmother’s funeral. Never angry at his father. Oh, Solomon, maybe you can be a minister.” 

She clasped her hands in prayer and closed her eyes. 

“I’m not going to be a minister. But what should I do when I grow up?” 

he asked. 

An  older  boy  at  school  had  told  a  bunch  of  guys  that  all  women  are whores  and  all  men  are  killers;  girls  cared  about  your  future  job  because they wanted to marry rich guys. 

“I don’t know, Minister Pachinko.” She laughed. “Hey, Christians aren’t supposed to fuck before marriage, right?” 

Solomon buttoned his suit jacket. It felt chilly outside, and his coat was still hanging in the hall closet upstairs. 

“You’re  still  a  virgin,”  she  said,  smiling.  “I  know.  That’s  okay.  You’re only fourteen. Do you want to?” 

“What?” 

“With  me?  I  can,  you  know.”  She  sucked  on  her  cigarette  again,  even more suggestively. “I’ve done it. A lot. I know what you’ll like.” Hana held the  necktie  his  father  had  tied  for  him  that  morning  by  the  knot,  then released her grasp slowly. 

Solomon refused to look at her face. 

The back door of the church opened slowly. Etsuko waved to them from the threshold. 

“It’s  cold.  Why  don’t  you  come  inside?  Solomon,  you  should  be  with your dad to greet the guests, right?” 

Solomon  could  hear  the  anxiety  in  Etsuko’s  voice.  Hana  tossed  her cigarette and followed him inside. 

At the reception, Hana continued to trail after Solomon. She asked him to guess her bra size. Solomon had no idea, but he was now thinking of her

breasts. 

The guests, mostly old people, left them alone, so the two milled around the reception. 

“Let’s get beer at the 7-Eleven. We can go to my house to drink it. Or we can go to the park.” 

“I don’t feel like beer.” 

“Maybe you feel like having some pussy.” 

“Hana!” 

“Oh, shut up. You like me. I know you do.” 

“Why do you have to talk like that?” 

“Because  I’m  not  a  nice  girl,  and  you  don’t  want  to  fuck  a  nice  girl. 

Especially  for  your  first  time.  Nobody  does.  I  don’t  want  to  marry  you, Solomon. I don’t need your money.” 

“What are you talking about?” 

“Fuck you,” Hana said, and walked away from him. 

Solomon caught up with her and grabbed her arm. 

Hana gave him a chilly smile. It was as if she’d become someone else. 

She was wearing a dark blue wool dress with a white Peter Pan collar that made her look younger than him. 

His grandmother Sunja appeared. 

“Halmoni,”  Solomon  said,  relieved  to  see  her.  He  felt  excited  around Hana,  but  she  also  made  him  nervous  and  afraid.  In  her  presence,  it  felt safer to have an adult around. Just yesterday, he caught her stealing a packet of  chocolate  wafers  at  the   conbini.  When  she  left  the  shop,  Solomon  had lingered to give the clerk the money for the wafers, worried that the clerk might  get  in  trouble.  In  his  dad’s  business,  if  items  were  missing,  clerks were fired immediately. 

Sunja  smiled  at  them.  She  touched  Solomon’s  upper  arm  as  if  to  calm him. He looked flustered. 

“You look very handsome in your suit.” 

“This is Hana,” Solomon said, and Hana bowed to her formally. 

Sunja nodded. The girl was very beautiful, but she had a defiant chin. 

Sunja  was  on  her  way  to  talk  with  Mozasu  but  felt  funny  leaving Solomon with the beautiful girl. 

“I’ll see you at home afterwards?” she asked. 

Solomon nodded. 

As soon as Sunja turned in the other direction, the girl led him outside the building. 

Koh  Hansu  was  walking  with  a  cane.  When  he  spotted  Sunja  walking diagonally across the reception room, he called out to her. 

Sunja heard his voice; this was too much. 

“Your  mother  was  a  tough  woman.  I  always  thought  she  was  tougher than you.” 

Sunja  stared  at  him.  In  the  moments  before  her  death,  her  mother  had said that this man had ruined her life, but had he? He had given her Noa; unless she had been pregnant, she wouldn’t have married Isak, and without Isak, she wouldn’t have had Mozasu and now her grandson Solomon. She didn’t want to hate him anymore. What did Joseph say to his brothers who had sold him into slavery when he saw them again? “You intended to harm me, but God intended it for good to accomplish what is now being done, the saving of many lives.” This was something Isak had taught her when she’d asked him about the evil of this world. 

“I came by to see if you were okay. If you needed anything.” 

“Thank you.” 

“My wife died.” 

“I’m sorry to hear that.” 

“I  could  never  divorce  her  because  her  father  was  my  boss.  He  had adopted me.” 

A while back, Mozasu had explained to her that after Hansu’s father-in-law retired, Hansu became the top man in the second most powerful yakuza family in all of Kansai. 

“You don’t have to explain anything to me. We don’t have anything to talk about, you and I. Thank you for coming today.” 

“Why do you have to be so cold? I thought you’d marry me now.” 

“What? This is my mother’s funeral. Why are you still alive and my Noa gone? I couldn’t even go to my own child’s—” 

“He was my only—” 

“No, no, no. He was my son. Mine.” 

Sunja marched to the kitchen, leaving him leaning on his cane. She could

not  stop  sobbing,  and  when  the  women  in  the  kitchen  saw  her,  they embraced  her.  A  woman  she  did  not  know  rubbed  her  back  gently.  They thought she was grieving for her mother. 

14

Yokohama, 1980

It was too exciting, and Solomon had never been with anyone. Hana knew a lot, so she taught him to think about other things, to close his eyes if he got too excited, because it was important for him to wait until she was done. 

Girls  would  not  want  to  fuck  again  if  he  came  in  a  minute,  she  said. 

Solomon  did  everything  Hana  told  him  to  do,  not  just  because  he  was  in awe of her, but because he wanted to make her happy. He would have done almost anything to make her laugh, because even though she was smart, too lovely to bear almost, and thrilling, she was also sad and restless. She could not be still; she could not bear not to drink every day. It was also important for her to have sex, so for six months she made him her ideal lover, even though he was not yet fifteen. She was almost seventeen. 

It  started  after  Yangjin’s  funeral.  Hana  bought  beer,  and  they  went  to Etsuko’s apartment. She removed her dress and blouse, then she took off his clothes. She pulled him to her bed, put a rubber on his cock, and showed him  what  to  do.  He  was  amazed  at  her  body,  and  she  was  amused  by  his happiness. Hana was not angry that he came right away—she had expected this—but after he did, she started her lessons. 

Almost  every  day,  they  met  at  Etsuko’s  place  and  made  love  several times. Etsuko was never home, and Solomon told his grandmother that he was with friends. He went home for dinner, because his father expected him at the table, and usually she went to Etsuko’s restaurant for her meal. 

After  being  with  her,  Solomon  felt  different;  he  felt  older  and  more serious about life. He was still a boy; he knew that, but he started to think about how he could be with her all the time, not just after school and during breaks.  When  he  was  at  school,  he  did  as  much  work  as  possible  so  he could see her without thinking about schoolwork. His father expected good grades,  and  Solomon  was  a  strong  student.  When  he  wasn’t  with  her,  he wondered what she did when she went out. Often, he worried about losing her to an older boy, but she said there was nothing to worry about. 

Etsuko and Mozasu did not know they were having sex, and Hana told Solomon  that  they  must  never  know.  She  told  him,  “I’m  your  secret  girl, and you are my secret boy,  nee?” 

One  afternoon,  about  four  months  in,  Solomon  came  over  to  the apartment  and  found  Hana  waiting  for  him  wearing  flesh-colored  lingerie and high heels. She looked like a petite-sized centerfold in  Playboy. 

“Do you have any money, Solomon?” she asked. 

“Yeah, sure. Why?” 

“I want some. I have to buy things to turn you on. Like this. Pretty,  nee?” 

Solomon tried to embrace her, but she pushed her left hand out gently. 

“Money, please.” 

Solomon pulled out his billfold and took out a thousand-yen note. 

“What do you need it for?” he asked. 

“I just do. Do you have any more?” 

“Uh,  sure.”  Solomon  pulled  out  the  emergency  five-thousand-yen  note that  he  kept  folded  in  a  square  behind  the  wallet-sized  photograph  of  his mother. His father told him he always had to have some money just in case something important came up. 

“Give it to Hana-chan, please.” 

Solomon handed it to her, and Hana put it on the table with the thousand-yen note. 

Hana walked slowly to the shelf where Etsuko kept a radio and fiddled with the channels until she found a pop song she liked. She bent over and started  swaying  her  hips  in  time  to  the  music,  making  sure  that  he  was watching her. Solomon went to her, and she turned around and unbuttoned his jeans. Without saying a word, she pushed him into the armchair near her and got on her knees. Solomon never knew what she was going to do. 

Hana slid the straps of her lace-trimmed brassiere over her shoulders and

pulled out her breasts over the small cups so he could see her nipples. He tried to touch them, but she swatted him away. With her hands cradling his bottom, she started to suck him. 

When he was done, he saw that she was crying. 

“Hana-chan, what’s the matter?” 

“Go home, Solomon.” 

“What?” 

“You’re finished.” 

“I came to see you. What’s this all about?” 

“Go  home,  Solomon!  You’re  just  this  little  boy  who  wants  to  fuck.  I need money, and this isn’t enough. What am I going to do?” 

“What are you talking about?” 

“Go home and do your homework. Go have dinner with your daddy and granny! You’re all the same. I’m just a kid with divorced parents. You think I’m  nothing.  You  think  I’m  a  loser  because  my  mother  was  the  town whore.” 

“What are you talking about? Why are you mad at me? I don’t think that, Hana. I could never think that. You can come over, too. I thought you were going to your mother’s restaurant after I left.” 

Hana covered her breasts and went to the bathroom to get her robe. She returned,  wearing  a  red   yukata.  She  got  really  quiet,  then  told  him  to  get more money and come back the next day. 

“Hana, we are friends,  nee? I love you. All the money I have, you can have. I have cash at home from my birthday presents, but my grandmother keeps it for me in her bureau. I can’t take it out all at once. What do you need it for?” 

“I  have  to  go,  Solomon.  I  can’t  stay  here  anymore.  I  have  to  be independent.” 

“Why? No. You can’t go.” 

Every day and night, he had been thinking of what he could do for work so they could live together. They were too young to marry, but he thought that after he graduated from high school, he could get a job and he could take care of her. He would marry her. Once, she had said that if she married, she would never divorce, because she could never do that to her children. 

Her  brothers  and  she  had  been  treated  worse  than  lepers  after  her  mother left,  she’d  said.  But  Solomon’s  father  wanted  him  to  go  to  college  in

America. How could he leave her behind? He wondered if she would come with him. They could marry after he finished college. 

“Solomon, I’m going to go to Tokyo and get a real life. I’m not going to stay in this apartment and wait for a fifteen-year-old to come and fuck me.” 

“What?” 

“I have to do something with my life. Yokohama is stupid, and I’d rather be dead than return to Hokkaido.” 

“How about that school your mom found?” 

“I can’t go to school. I’m not smart like you. I want to be on television, like  those  girls  in  the  dramas,  but  I  don’t  know  how  to  act.  I  can’t  sing, either. I have a terrible voice.” 

“Maybe you can learn how to act and sing. Aren’t there schools for that? 

Can’t we ask your mom to find you a school?” 

Hana brightened for a moment, then looked disappointed again. 

“She’d  just  think  it’s  foolish.  She  wouldn’t  help  me.  Not  for  that. 

Besides, I can’t read well, and you have to be able to read your lines and memorize them. I saw this really good actress interviewed on TV, and she said that she works really hard at reading and memorizing. I’m not good at anything—except sex. But what do I do when I’m not pretty anymore?” 

“You’ll always be beautiful, Hana.” 

She laughed. 

“No,  dummy.  Women  lose  their  looks  fast.  My  mother  is  looking  old. 

She better keep your dad. She’s not going to do any better.” 

“Can you work for your mom?” 

“No,  I’d  rather  die.  I  hate  the  smell  of  shoyu  and  oil  in  my  hair.  It’s disgusting.  I  can’t  imagine  bowing  all  day  to  lazy,  fat  customers  who complain about nothing. She hates the customers, too. She’s a hypocrite.” 

“Etsuko is not like that.” 

“That’s because you don’t know her.” 

Solomon stroked her hair, and Hana opened her robe and slipped off her panties. 

“Can  you  do  it  now?  Again?”  she  asked.  “I  need  that  thing  inside  me, you know? It’s always better the second time, because it lasts longer.” 

Solomon touched her, and he could. 

Every  day,  she  asked  for  money,  and  every  day  he  gave  her  some  of  his birthday money from the bureau until there was no more left. Whenever he came over, she wanted to try things, even when it hurt her a lot, because she told  him  that  she  needed  to  master  this.  Even  if  he  didn’t  like  a  certain method, she made him practice it and play certain roles. She learned how to make sounds and to talk the way girls talked in sex movies. A week after the money ran out, Solomon found a note she had hidden in his pencil case:

“One day, you will find a really good girl, not someone like me. I promise. 

But  it  was  fun,  nee?  I  am  your  dirty  flower,  Soro-chan.”  That  afternoon, Solomon ran to Etsuko’s apartment, and he learned that she was gone. He didn’t see her again until three years later when she met him at a famous unagiya in Tokyo to give him a sweater before he went to college in New York. 

15

New York, 1985

Where are you?” Solomon asked in Japanese. “Your mom doesn’t know where you are. Everyone’s worried.” 

“I don’t want to talk about her,” Hana replied. “So you have a girlfriend-o now?” 

“Yes,” Solomon answered without thinking. “Hana, are you okay?” No matter how many drinks she’d had, she tended to sound sober. 

“Tell me about her. Is she Japanese?” 

“No.” Solomon wanted to keep her on the line. About five years before, after  she  moved  out  of  Etsuko’s  apartment,  she  took  a  long  string  of hostessing  jobs  in  Tokyo,  refusing  to  tell  anyone  where  she  lived.  Etsuko didn’t know what to do anymore; she’d hired an investigator but had little luck tracking her down. “Hana, tell me where you are, and please call your mother—” 

“Shut up, college boy. Or else I’ll hang up.” 

“Oh, Hana. Why?” He had to smile, having missed even her petulance. 

“Why are you so difficult, Hana-chan?” 

“And why are you so far away?” 

Hana poured herself a smaller glass of wine, and Solomon heard the  glug of the liquid hitting the glass. It was morning in Tokyo, and she was sitting on the bare floor of her tiny apartment in Roppongi, which she shared with three other hostesses. Two were sleeping off the whiskey tea from the night

before, and the third hadn’t returned home from a date. 

“I miss you, Solomon. I miss my old friend. You were my only friend. 

You know that?” 

“You’re drinking. Are you okay?” 

“I like to drink. Drinking makes me happy. I’m very good at drinking.” 

She laughed and swallowed a thimbleful of wine. She wanted to make the bottle last. “I’m good at drinking and fucking.  Soo desu nee.” 

“Can you please tell me where you are?” 

“I’m in Tokyo.” 

“Still working in a club in Roppongi?” 

“Yes,  but  at  another  club.  You  don’t  know  which  one.”  She  had  been fired  two  nights  ago,  but  she  knew  she  could  get  another  job.  “I  am  an excellent hostess.” 

“I’m sure you would be excellent at whatever you decide to do.” 

“You do not approve of my work, but I do not care. I am not a prostitute. 

I pour drinks and make conversation with incredibly boring men and make them feel fascinating.” 

“I didn’t say that I didn’t approve.” 

“You lie.” 

“Hana-chan, why don’t you go to school? I think you would like college. 

You’re  smarter  than  most  of  the  kids  here.  Maybe  you  can  study  in America;  learn  English  first,  then  apply  to  a  college  here.  Your  mom  and my dad would pay for it. You know that.” 

“Why don’t I finish high school first?” Hana replied tartly. “Hang on, is your girlfriend with you now?” 

“No, but I have to meet her soon.” 

“No, you will not meet her, Solomon. You will talk to me. Because you are  my  old  friend,  and  I  want  to  talk  to  my  old  friend  tonight.  Can  you cancel? And I will call you back.” 

“I’ll call you. Yes, I’ll cancel, then I’ll call you back.” 

“I am not giving you my number. You cancel with girlfriend-o, and I will call you in five minutes.” 

“Are you okay, Hana?” 

“Why don’t you say you miss me, too, Solomon? You used to miss me desperately. Don’t you remember?” 

“Yes, I remember everything.” 

When they met for lunch after being apart for three years, she gave him a crimson-colored  cashmere  sweater  from  Burberry  as  a  graduation  present. 

“It’s  cold  in  Manhattan,  nee?  The  sweater  is  bloodred  and  hot  like  our burning love.” During the meal, however, she would not come close to him. 

She wouldn’t even touch his arm. She had smelled wonderful, like jasmine and sandalwood. 

“How  could  I  forget  you?”  Solomon  said  quietly.  Phoebe  would  be coming by in a few minutes. She had the key to his room. 

“Ah,  there.  There  is  my  Solomon.  I  can  tell  when  you  are  hungry  for me.” 

Solomon closed his eyes. She was right; this felt like hunger. It had been nothing  short  of  physical  pain  when  she  had  left  him,  and  he’d  had  no words to describe her departure. He loved Phoebe, but it wasn’t what he’d felt for Hana. 

“Hana-chan. I have to go now, but may I please phone you later? May I please have your number?” 

“No, Solomon. You may not have my number. I call you when I want to speak to you. You do not call me. Nobody calls me.” 

“And you get to leave when you want to leave,” he said. 

“Yes, I do get to leave, but Solomon, you will never tire of me, because I will never ask anything of you. Except for today. I want you to talk to me so I can go to sleep. I cannot sleep anymore, Solomon. I do not know why, but I cannot sleep anymore. Hana-chan is so tired.” 

“Why won’t you let your mother help you? I’m in New York. You won’t even tell me your number. How can I help—” 

“I  know,  I  know,  you  are  studying  and  becoming  an  international businessman of the world! This is what your rich papa wants, and Solomon is a good boy and he will make his pachinko papa proud!” 

“Hana, you have to be careful with the drinking,  nee?” He tried to sound calm. She would disappear if he sounded cross. 

The door opened, and it was Phoebe, looking happy at first, then puzzled because he was on the phone. Solomon smiled and gestured for her to sit down beside him. The dorm room had only a narrow bed and a serviceable desk, but he was lucky to have a single. He put his finger to his lips, and Phoebe mouthed to ask if she should go. He paused, then shook his head no. 

“Will you cancel with your girlfriend-o and help me sleep?” Hana asked. 

“If you were here, you’d fuck me, and I would sleep in your arms. We never got a chance to sleep in the same bed, because you were still a boy. Now you are twenty. I want to suck on your man cock.” 

“What do you want me to do, Hana? How can I help you?” 

“So-lo-mon-Ul-tra-man.  You  should  sing.  You  should  sing  to  me.  You know, the song about sunshine. I like that baby song about sunshine.” 

“I will sing if you will give me your phone number.” 

“You have to promise me that you will not give it to my mother.” 

“Okay. What is it?” Solomon wrote down the numbers on the backflap of his macroeconomics textbook. “I’m going to hang up, and then I will call you in a few seconds, okay?” 

“Okay,” she said weakly. She had finished the second bottle already. She felt  awake  but  heavy,  like  her  limbs  were  soaked  through.  “I’ll  hang  up now. Call me. I want to hear you sing.” 

When he hung up, Phoebe asked, “Hey, what’s going on?” 

“One minute. Just one minute. I’ll explain.” 

He dialed his father, and Mozasu picked up. 

“Papa, this is Hana’s number. I think she’s really sick. Can you find out where  she  is  just  from  this  number?  Can  you  ask  Haruki  or  Etsuko’s investigator? I better go. I have to call her back now. She sounds like she’s drunk or drugged out.” 

Solomon dialed the number. It was for a Chinese restaurant in Roppongi. 

Phoebe took off her overcoat and stripped down and got into bed. Her dark hair hung loosely around her pale collarbone. 

“Who was that?” 

“Hana. My stepmother’s daughter.” 

“Which makes her your stepsister? The one who’s working as a hooker.” 

“She’s not a hooker. She’s a hostess.” 

“They have sex for money, right?” 

“No. Not always. Sometimes. Depends.” 

“Well,  gosh,  that’s  a  major  distinction.  Once  again,  you’ve  enlightened me on the finer points of Japanese culture. Thank you.” 

The phone rang, and Solomon rushed to pick up. It was Etsuko this time. 

“Solomon. The number. It was for a Chinese restaurant.” 

“Yes, I’m sorry. But I did speak to her, Etsuko. She was very drunk. She said she’s working at a different club now. Didn’t her former mama-san say anything about where she is now?” 

“We  couldn’t  find  anything.  She’d  been  fired  from  two  other  places. 

Every time we get closer, she gets fired for drinking too much.” 

“If I hear anything, I’ll let you know right away, okay?” 

“It is night there,  nee?” 

“Hai. Hana said she couldn’t sleep. I was worried she was taking speed while drinking. I heard girls do that at clubs.” 

“You  should  go  to  sleep,  Solomon.  Mozasu  said  you’re  doing  well  in school. We’re proud of you,” she said. “Night-night, Solomon-chan.” 

Phoebe smiled. 

“So  you  lost  your  cherry  to  your  hooker  half  sister,  and  now  she’s  in trouble.” 

“Compassionate of you.” 

“Quite liberal and tolerant of me not to be upset that your ex is calling you drunk when she’s a professional sex worker. Either I’m confident in my value, or I’m confident in our relationship, or I’m just ignorant of the fact that you’re going to hurt my feelings when you return to a troubled young damsel whom I know you’re interested in rescuing.” 

“I can’t rescue her.”

Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

“You  just  tried  and  failed,  because  she  does  not  want  your  help.  She wants to die.” 

“What?” 

“Yes, Solomon. This young woman wants to die.” She pushed back his forelocks and looked at him kindly. She kissed him on the mouth. “There are a lot of troubled young women in this world. We can’t save them all.” 

Hana  didn’t  phone  him  again.  Months  later,  Etsuko  learned  that  she  was working in a Kabukicho  toruko-buro where she bathed men for money. The investigator  told  her  what  time  Hana  would  finish  her  shift,  and  Etsuko

waited outside the building. Several girls came out, and Hana was the last to leave. Etsuko couldn’t believe how much she’d aged. The investigator had explained  that  Etsuko  might  not  recognize  her  because  she  would  look much older. Hana’s face was withered and dry. She wore no makeup, and her clothes didn’t look clean. 

“Hana,” Etsuko said. 

Hana saw her, then walked in the other direction. 

“Leave me alone.” 

“Hana, oh, please, Hana.” 

“Go away.” 

“Hana, we can forget all this. Start again. I shouldn’t have tried to make you go to school. I’m sorry.” 

“No.” 

“You don’t have to work here. I have money.” 

“I don’t want your money. I don’t want the pachinko man’s money. I can earn my own.” 

“Where do you live? Can we go to your place to talk?” 

“No.” 

“I’m not going to go away.” 

“Yes, yes, you will. You’re selfish.” 

Etsuko stood there, believing that if she could just listen and suffer, then maybe her daughter could be saved. 

“I am terrible.  Soo desu. Forgive me, Hana. Anything but this.” 

Hana  dropped  her  large  tote  bag  from  her  shoulder,  and  the  two  wine bottles wrapped in a towel made a muffled clinking sound on the pavement. 

She  wept  openly,  her  arms  hanging  by  her  side,  and  Etsuko  knelt  on  the ground and held her daughter’s knees, refusing to let her go. 

16

Tokyo, 1989

Solomon  was  glad  to  be  back  home.  The  job  at  Travis  Brothers  was turning out better than expected. The pay was more than he deserved for a job  a  year  out  of  college,  and  he  enjoyed  the  numerous  benefits  of  being hired as an expat rather than as a local. The HR people at Travis got him a fancy  rental  broker  who  found  him  a  decent  one-bedroom  in  Minami-Azabu,  which  Phoebe  didn’t  think  was  too  awful.  As  his  corporate employer,  Travis  was  named  guarantor  on  the  lease,  since  Solomon  was legally a foreigner in Japan. Solomon, who had grown up in Yokohama in his father’s house, had never rented an apartment before. For non-Japanese renters,  requiring  a  guarantor  was  common  practice,  which,  of  course, incensed Phoebe. 

After some cajoling, Phoebe had decided to follow him to Tokyo. They were thinking of getting married, and moving together to Japan was the first step. Now that she was here, he felt bad for her. Solomon was employed at the  Japanese  subsidiary  of  a  British  investment  bank,  so  he  worked alongside  Brits,  Americans,  Aussies,  Kiwis,  and  the  occasional  South African among the Western-educated locals, who were less parochial than the natives. As a Korean Japanese educated in the States, Solomon was both a  local  and  a  foreigner,  with  the  useful  knowledge  of  the  native  and  the financial  privileges  of  an  expatriate.  Phoebe,  however,  did  not  enjoy  his status  and  privileges.  Rather,  she  spent  her  days  at  home  reading  or

wandering around Tokyo, not sure why she was here at all since Solomon was  rarely  home.  It  was  impossible  for  her  to  get  a  work  visa,  as  they weren’t married; she was thinking of teaching English, but she didn’t know how to get a tutoring job. Now and then, when a Japanese person asked her an  innocent  question  like  if  she  was  South  Korean,  Phoebe  tended  to overreact. 

“In America, there is no such thing as a  Kankokujin or  Chosenjin. Why the  hell  would  I  be  a  South  Korean  or  a  North  Korean?  That  makes  no sense! I was born in Seattle, and my parents came to the States when there was only one Korea,” she’d shout, relating one of the bigotry anecdotes of her day. “Why does Japan still distinguish the two countries for its Korean residents  who’ve  been  here  for  four  fucking  generations?  You  were  born here. You’re not a foreigner! That’s insane. Your father was born here. Why are you two carrying South Korean passports? It’s bizarre.” 

She  knew  as  well  as  he  did  that  after  the  peninsula  was  divided,  the Koreans in Japan ended up choosing sides, often more than once, affecting their residency status. It was still hard for a Korean to become a Japanese citizen, and there were many who considered such a thing shameful—for a Korean to try to become a citizen of its former oppressor. When she told her friends in New York about this curious historical anomaly and the pervasive ethnic  bias,  they  were  incredulous  at  the  thought  that  the  friendly,  well-mannered Japanese they knew could ever think she was somehow criminal, lazy,  filthy,  or  aggressive—the  negative  stereotypical  traits  of  Koreans  in Japan.  “Well,  everyone  knows  that  the  Koreans  don’t  get  along  with  the Japanese,”  her  friends  would  say  innocently,  as  if  all  things  were  equal. 

Soon, Phoebe stopped talking about it with her friends back home. 

Solomon found it peculiar that Phoebe got so angry about the history of Koreans in Japan. After three months of living in Tokyo and reading a few history books, she’d concluded that the Japanese would never change. “The government still refuses to acknowledge its war crimes!” Strangely, in these conversations, Solomon found himself defending the Japanese. 

They planned on visiting Seoul together for a week when the deal season ended  and  work  slowed  down.  He  hoped  Seoul  would  be  some  sort  of neutral  territory  for  them—a  place  to  feel  normal  since  they  were  both Korean  immigrants  of  a  kind.  And  it  didn’t  hurt  that  Phoebe  spoke  very good Korean; his Korean was pathetic at best. He had visited South Korea

with his father several times, and everyone there always treated them like they were Japanese. It was no homecoming; however, it was great to visit. 

After a while, it had been easier just to play along as Japanese tourists who had  come  to  enjoy  the  good  barbecue  rather  than  to  try  to  explain  to  the chest-beating,  self-righteous  Koreans  why  their  first  language  was Japanese. 

Solomon  was  in  love  with  Phoebe.  They  had  been  together  since sophomore year. He couldn’t imagine life without her, and yet, seeing her discomfort here made him realize how different they were. They were both ethnically  Korean  and  had  grown  up  outside  Korea,  but  they  weren’t  the same.  Back  home,  on  the  ground  in  Japan,  their  differences  seemed  that much more pronounced. They hadn’t had sex in two weeks. Would it be that way when they married? Would it get worse? Solomon thought about these things as he headed to the game. 

Tonight was his fourth poker night with the guys at work. Solomon and one other junior associate, Louis, a  hapa M & A guy from Paris, had been asked to join; the rest of the players were managing directors and executive directors. The cast changed a little, but there were usually six or seven guys. 

Never any girls. Solomon was a brilliant poker player. In the first game, he had played it easy and come out neutral; in the second game, when he felt more  comfortable,  he  came  second,  and  after  the  third  game,  Solomon walked out with most of the 350,000-yen pot. The others were annoyed, but he thought it was worth making a point—when he wanted to win, he could. 

This evening, he planned to pay up a little. The guys were a good bunch

—no sore losers; Solomon hoped to keep playing with them. No doubt, they had invited him thinking he was more or less a fish; they didn’t know that he was an econ major at Columbia who had double minored in poker and pool. 

They played Anaconda, also called “Pass the Trash” because you could get rid of your bad cards to the guy on your left—first three cards, then two cards, and then one more, betting all the while. A moron could have won the  game,  because  there  was  so  much  luck  involved,  but  what  Solomon enjoyed was the betting. He liked watching others bet or go out. 

The  players  met  in  the  paneled  basement  of  a  no-name   izakaya  in Roppongi.  The  owner  was  a  friend  of  Kazu-san,  Solomon’s  boss  and  the most senior managing director at Travis, and he let them use the room once

a  month  as  long  as  they  drank  enough  and  ordered  plenty  of  food.  Each month,  one  guy  hosted  and  picked  up  the  tab.  Initially,  the  managing directors thought it wasn’t fair to make the associates pay, since they earned much less, but after Solomon won on the third game, enough of them said

“The kid can buy dinner.” Solomon was hosting this one. 

Six  guys  were  playing,  and  the  pot  was  300,000  yen.  Three  hands  in, Solomon kept it safe: He won nothing and lost nothing. 

“Hey, Solly,” Kazu said, “what’s going on? Did luck leave you, buddy?” 

His boss, Kazu, was a Japanese national who was educated in California and  Texas,  and  despite  his  bespoke  suits  and  elegant  Tokyo  dialect,  his English  speech  pattern  was  pure  American  frat  boy.  His  family  tree  was filled with dukes and counts who had been stripped of their titles after the war,  and  his  mother’s  side  came  from  connected  branches  of  shogun families. At Travis, Kazu made lots of rain. Five of the six most important banking deals last year took place because Kazu had made them happen. It was  also  Kazu  who  had  brought  Solomon  into  the  game.  The  older  guys grumbled  about  losing  to  the  kid,  but  Kazu  shut  them  up,  saying  that competition was good for everyone. 

Solomon liked his boss; everyone did. He was lucky to be one of Kazu’s boys  and  to  be  invited  to  the  famous  monthly  poker  games.  There  were guys in Kazu’s team who had worked for Travis for ten years and had never been  asked.  Whenever  Phoebe  said  Japanese  people  were  racist,  Solomon would bring up Etsuko and Kazu as personal evidence for his argument to the  contrary.  Etsuko  was  the  obvious  example  of  a  Japanese  person  who was kindhearted and ethnically unbiased, but Phoebe barely understood her, since  Etsuko’s  English  was  terrible.  Kazu  was  Japanese,  and  he  had  been far  kinder  to  Solomon  than  most  Koreans  in  Japan,  who  had  occasionally eyed him with suspicion as a wealthy man’s son or as competition at school. 

Yes,  some  Japanese  thought  Koreans  were  scum,  but  some  Koreans  were scum, he told Phoebe. Some Japanese were scum, too. There was no need to keep rehashing the past; he hoped Phoebe would get over it eventually. 

It  was  time  to  discard,  take  new  cards,  and  place  bets.  Solomon  threw away  a  useless  nine  of  diamonds  and  a  two  of  hearts,  then  picked  up  the jack  and  a  three  he  needed  for  a  full  house.  Luck  had  never  left  him. 

Whenever  Solomon  played  cards,  he  felt  strong  and  smooth,  like  he couldn’t lose; he wondered if he felt this way because he didn’t care about

the money. He liked being at the table; he liked the bullshit guy talk. With this hand, he had a solid chance at the current pot, which was easily over a hundred  thousand  yen.  Solomon  bet  thirty  thousand.  Louis  and  Yamada-san,  the  Japanese  Aussie,  folded,  leaving  Solomon,  Ono,  Giancarlo,  and Kazu. Ono’s face was blank and Giancarlo scratched his ear. 

Ono bet another twenty thousand, and immediately, Kazu and Giancarlo folded. Giancarlo said, laughing, “You two are assholes.” He took a long sip of his whiskey. “Are there any more of those chicken things on sticks?” 

“Yakitori,”  Kazu  said,  “You  live  in  Japan;  dude,  learn  what  to  call chicken on a stick.” 

Giancarlo  gave  him  the  finger,  smiling  and  revealing  his  short,  even teeth. 

Kazu signaled to the waiter and ordered for everyone. 

It  was  time  to  show  hands,  and  Ono  only  had  two  pairs.  He’d  been bluffing. 

Solomon fanned out his cards. 

“You son of a bitch,” Ono said. 

“Sorry, sir,” Solomon said, sweeping the money toward him in an easy, practiced manner. 

“Never apologize for winning, Solly,” Kazu said. 

“He can apologize a little for taking my money,” Giancarlo retorted, and the others laughed. 

“Man,  I  can’t  wait  until  I  put  you  on  one  of  my  deals.  You  will  be hanging  out  with  boxes  of  due  diligence  all  fucking  weekend,  and  I  will make  sure  you  only  get  ugly  girls  to  work  with,”  Ono  said.  He  had  a doctorate  in  economics  from  MIT  and  was  on  his  fourth  marriage.  Each successive  wife  was  even  more  gorgeous  than  the  prior  one.  As  a  very senior  electronics  banker  during  the  Japan  boom,  he  had  made  obscene money and still worked without stopping. Ono said that the purpose of hard work was simple: Sex with pretty women was worth whatever it took. 

“I will find the worst deal with the maximum diligence. Just for you, my little friend.” Ono rubbed his hands together. 

“He’s taller than you,” Giancarlo said. 

“Status trumps size,” Ono replied. 

“Gomen nasai, Ono-san,  gomen nasai.” Solomon bowed theatrically. 

“Don’t worry about it, Solly,” Kazu said. “Ono’s got a heart of gold.” 

“Not true. I’m capable of holding a grudge and taking vengeance at the most opportune moment,” Ono said. 

Solomon  raised  his  eyebrows  and  shivered.  “I’m  just  a  boy,  sir,”  he pleaded. “Have mercy.” He proceeded to make neat stacks of cash in front of him. “A rich boy who deserves some mercy.” 

“I  heard  you  were  filthy  rich,”  Giancarlo  said.  “Your  dad’s  a  pachinko guy, right?” 

Solomon nodded, not sure how he knew. 

“I used to date a hot Japanese  hapa who played a lot of pachinko. She was an expensive habit. Figures you know how to gamble. It must be that clever Korean blood,” Giancarlo said. “Man, that girl used to go on and on about  the  tricky  and  smart  Koreans  who  owned  all  the  parlors  and  made fools  out  of  the  Japanese—but,  man,  she  used  to  do  this  crazy  thing  with her tits when—” 

“Impossible,” Kazu said. “You never dated a hot girl.” 

“Yeah,  you  got  me,  sensei.  I  dated  your  wife,  and  she’s  not  very  hot. 

She’s just a real—” 

Kazu laughed. “Hey, how ’bout if we play poker?” He poured soda into his whiskey, lightening the color considerably. “Solly won fair and square.” 

“I’m not saying anything bad. It’s a compliment. The Koreans here are smart and rich. Just like our boy Solomon. It wasn’t like I was calling him a yakuza!  You’re  not  going  to  get  me  killed,  are  you,  Solly?”  Giancarlo asked. 

Solomon  smiled  tentatively.  It  wasn’t  the  first  time  he’d  heard  these things, but it had been a very long while since anyone had mentioned his father’s business. In America, no one even knew what pachinko was. It was his  father  who’d  been  confident  that  there  would  be  less  bigotry  at  the offices  of  a  Western  bank  and  had  encouraged  him  to  take  this  job. 

Giancarlo  wasn’t  saying  anything  different  from  what  other  middle-class Japanese  people  thought  or  whispered;  it  was  just  strange  to  hear  such  a thing coming from a white Italian who had lived in Japan for twenty years. 

Louis cut the cards, and Kazu shuffled and dealt the guys a fresh hand. 

Solomon  had  three  kings,  but  he  discarded  them  one  by  one  in  three consecutive rounds, then folded, losing about ten thousand yen. At the end of the night, he paid the tab. Kazu said he wanted to talk to him, so they walked out to the street to hail a taxi. 

17

You  lost  on  purpose.  The  three  kings  came  from  you,”  Kazu  said  to Solomon.  They  were  standing  outside  the   izakaya  building.  Kazu  lit  a Marlboro Light. 

Solomon shrugged. 

“That  was  dumb.  Giancarlo  is  a  social  retard.  He’s  one  of  those  white guys  who  has  to  live  in  Asia  because  the  white  people  back  home  don’t want  him.  He’s  been  in  Japan  for  so  long  that  he  thinks  when  Japanese people suck up to him, it’s because he’s so special. What a fucking fantasy. 

That said, not a bad guy overall. Effective. Gets shit done. You gotta know this  by  now,  that  people  here,  even  the  non-Japanese,  say  the  dumbest things  about  Koreans,  but  you  gotta  forget  it.  When  I  was  in  the  States, people used to say stupid-ass crap about Asians, like we all spoke Chinese and  ate  sushi  for  breakfast.  When  it  came  to  teaching  US  history,  they’d forget the internment and Hiroshima. Whatever, right?” 

“That  stuff  doesn’t  get  to  me,”  Solomon  replied,  scanning  the  dark streets for a taxi. The trains had stopped running half an hour before. “I’m good.” 

“Okay,  tough  guy,”  Kazu  said.  “Listen,  there  is  a  tax,  you  know,  on success.” 

“Huh?” 

“If you do well at anything, you gotta pay up to all the people who did worse.  On  the  other  hand,  if  you  do  badly,  life  makes  you  pay  a  shit  tax, too. Everybody pays something.” 

Kazu looked at him soberly. 

“Of course, the worst one is the tax on the mediocre. Now, that one’s a bitch.” Kazu tossed his cigarette and crossed his arms. “Pay attention: The

ones who pay the shit tax are mostly people who were born in the wrong place and the wrong time and are hanging on to the planet by their broken fingernails. They don’t even know the fucking rules of the game. You can’t even  get  mad  at  ’em  when  they  lose.  Life  just  fucks  and  fucks  and  fucks bastards  like  that.”  Kazu  wrinkled  his  brow  in  resignation,  like  he  was somewhat  concerned  about  life’s  inequities  but  not  very.  He  took  a  deep breath. “So, those losers have to climb Mount Everest to get out of hell, and maybe one or two in five hundred thousand break out, but the rest pay the shit tax all their lives, then they die. If God exists and if He’s fair, then it makes sense that in the afterlife, those guys should get the better seats.” 

Solomon nodded, not understanding where this was going. 

Kazu’s stare remained unbroken. “But all those able-bodied middle-class people who are scared of their shadows, well, they pay the mediocre tax in regular quarterly installments with compounding interest. When you play it safe, that’s what happens, my friend. So if I were you, I wouldn’t throw any games. I’d use every fucking advantage. Beat anyone who fucks with you to  a  fucking  pulp.  Show  no  mercy  to  chumps,  especially  if  they  don’t deserve it. Make the pussies cry.” 

“So then the success tax comes from envy, and the shit tax comes from exploitation. Okay.” Solomon nodded like he was starting to get it. “Then what’s the mediocre tax? How can it be wrong to—?” 

“Good question, young Jedi. The tax for being mediocre comes from you and  everyone  else  knowing  that  you  are  mediocre.  It’s  a  heavier  tax  than you’d think.” 

Solomon had never thought of such a thing before. It wasn’t like he saw himself as terribly special, but he’d never seen himself as mediocre, either. 

Perhaps  it  was  unspoken,  even  to  himself,  but  he  did  want  to  be  good  at something. 

“Jedi, understand this: There’s nothing fucking worse than knowing that you’re just like everybody else. What a messed-up, lousy existence. And in this  great  country  of  Japan—the  birthplace  of  all  my  fancy  ancestors—

everyone, everyone wants to be like everyone else. That’s why it is such a safe place to live, but it’s also a dinosaur village. It’s extinct, pal. Carve up your  piece  and  invest  your  spoils  elsewhere.  You’re  a  young  man,  and someone  should  tell  you  the  real  truth  about  this  country.  Japan  is  not fucked  because  it  lost  the  war  or  did  bad  things.  Japan  is  fucked  because

there  is  no  more  war,  and  in  peacetime  everyone  actually  wants  to  be mediocre and is terrified of being different. The other thing is that the elite Japanese  want  to  be  English  and  white.  That’s  pathetic,  delusional,  and merits another discussion entirely.” 

Solomon thought some of this made sense. Everyone he knew who was really  Japanese  did  think  he  was  middle-class  even  when  he  wasn’t.  Rich kids  at  his  high  school  whose  fathers  owned  several  country-club memberships worth millions and millions thought of themselves as middle-class. His uncle Noa, whom he’d never met, had apparently killed himself because he wanted to be Japanese and normal. 

An  empty  taxi  approached  them,  but  Solomon  didn’t  notice,  and  Kazu smiled. 

“So, yeah, idiots are going to get on your case and notice that your dad owns pachinko parlors. And how do people know this?” 

“I never talk about it.” 

“Everyone knows, Solomon. In Japan, you’re either a rich Korean or a poor Korean, and if you are a rich Korean, there’s a pachinko parlor in your background somewhere.” 

“My dad is a great guy. He’s incredibly honest.” 

“I’m sure he is.” Kazu faced him squarely, his arms still crossed against his chest. 

Solomon  hesitated  but  said  it  anyway:  “He’s  not  some  gangster.  He doesn’t do bad things. He’s an ordinary businessman. He pays all his taxes and  does  everything  by  the  book.  There  are  some  shady  guys  in  the business, but my dad is incredibly precise and moral. He owns three parlors. 

It’s not like—” 

Kazu nodded reassuringly. 

“My father’s never taken anything that wasn’t his; he doesn’t even care about money. He gives away so much of it—” 

Etsuko had told him that Mozasu paid the nursing home bills for several of his employees. 

“Solly, Solly. No, man, there’s no need to explain. It’s not like Koreans had  a  lot  of  choices  in  regular  professions.  I’m  sure  he  chose  pachinko because  there  wasn’t  much  else.  He’s  probably  an  excellent  businessman. 

You think your poker skills came out of a vacuum? Maybe your dad could have worked for Fuji or Sony, but it wasn’t like they were going to hire a

Korean, right? I doubt they’d hire you now, Mr. Columbia University. Japan still doesn’t hire Koreans to be teachers, cops, and nurses in lots of places. 

You couldn’t even rent your own apartment in Tokyo, and you make good money.  It’s  fucking  1989!  Anyway,  you  can  be  polite  about  it,  but  that’s fucked up. I’m Japanese but I’m not stupid. I lived in America and Europe for a long time; it’s crazy what the Japanese have done to the Koreans and the  Chinese  who  were  born  here.  It’s  fucking  bonkers;  you  people  should have a revolution. You don’t protest enough. You and your dad were born here, right?” 

Solomon nodded, not understanding why Kazu was getting so worked up about this. 

“Even if your dad was a hit man, I wouldn’t give a shit. And I wouldn’t turn him in.” 

“But he’s not.” 

“No,  kid,  of  course  he’s  not,”  Kazu  said,  smiling.  “Go  home  to  your girlfriend. I heard she’s a looker and smart. That’s good. Because in the end, brains matter more than you think,” he said, laughing. 

Kazu hailed a taxi and told Solomon to take it before him. Everyone said that Kazu wasn’t like regular bosses, and it was true. 

A week later, he put Solomon on the new real estate deal, and Solomon was the youngest one on the team. This was the cool transaction that all the guys in the office wanted. One of Travis’s heavyweight banking clients wanted to purchase  land  in  Yokohama  to  build  a  world-class  golf  course.  Nearly  all the details had been worked out; they needed to get three of the remaining landowners  to  sign  on.  Two  were  not  impossible,  just  expensive,  but  the third was a headache—the old woman had no interest in money and could not  be  bought  out.  Her  lot  was  where  the  eleventh  hole  would  be.  At  the morning meeting, with the client present, two of the banking directors gave a strong presentation about the beneficial ways of structuring the mortgage, and Solomon took careful notes. Right before the meeting broke up, Kazu mentioned casually that the old woman was still holding up progress. The client smiled at Kazu and said, “No doubt, you will be able to handle the matter. We are confident.” 

Kazu smiled politely. 

The client left quickly, and everyone else scattered out of the conference room shortly thereafter. Kazu stopped Solomon before he had a chance to return to his desk. 

“What are you doing for lunch, Solly?” 

“I was going to grab something from downstairs. Why? What’s up?” 

“Let’s go for a drive.” 

The  chauffeur  took  them  to  the  old  woman’s  lot  in  Yokohama.  The  gray concrete  building  was  in  decent  condition,  and  the  front  yard  was  well maintained.  No  one  seemed  to  be  home.  An  ancient  pine  tree  cast  a triangular shade across the facade of the square structure, and a thin brook gurgled from the back of the house. It was a former fabric-dyeing factory and now the private residence of the woman. Her children were dead, and there were no obvious heirs. 

“So  how  do  you  get  a  person  to  do  what  you  want  when  she  doesn’t want to?” Kazu asked. 

“I don’t know,” Solomon said. He’d figured that this was a kind of field trip  for  Kazu,  and  his  boss  wanted  the  company.  Rarely  did  Kazu  go anywhere alone. 

The car was parked in the wide, dusty street opposite the old woman’s lot. If she was home, she would have noticed the black town car idling not ten yards from her house. But no one came outside or stirred within. 

Kazu stared at the house. 

“So  this  is  where  Sonoko  Matsuda  lives.  The  client  is  confident  that  I can get Matsuda-san to sell.” 

“Can you?” Solomon asked. 

“I think so, but I don’t know how,” Kazu said. 

“This  will  sound  stupid,  but  how  can  you  get  her  to  sign  if  you  don’t know how?” Solomon asked. 

“I’m making a wish, Solly. I’m making a wish. Sometimes, that’s how it starts.” 

Kazu  asked  the  chauffeur  to  take  them  to  an   unagi  restaurant  not  far from there. 

18

Yokohama, 1989

On Sunday morning, after church services, Solomon and Phoebe took the train to Yokohama for lunch with his family. 

As usual, the front door of the house was closed but unlocked, so they let themselves in. A designer friend of Etsuko’s had recently renovated it, and the house was unrecognizable from the one of Solomon’s childhood filled with  dark  American  furniture.  The  designer  had  removed  most  of  the original interior walls and knocked out the small back windows, replacing them with thick sheets of glass. Now it was possible to see the rock garden from  the  front  of  the  house.  Pale-colored  furniture,  white  oak  floors,  and sculptural paper lamps filled the vast quadrant near the woodburning stove, leaving  the  large,  square-shaped  living  room  light  and  uncluttered.  In  the opposite  corner  of  the  room,  tall  branches  of  forsythia  bloomed  in  an enormous celadon-colored ceramic jar on the floor. The house looked like a glamorous Buddhist temple. 

Mozasu came out from the den to greet them. 

“You’re here!” he said to Phoebe in Korean. When she spent time with Solomon’s family, the group spoke three languages. Phoebe spoke Korean with the elders and English with Solomon, while Solomon spoke mostly in Japanese to the elders and English to Phoebe; with everyone translating in bits, they made it work somehow. 

Mozasu  opened  the  shoe  closet  by  the  door  and  offered  them  house

slippers. 

“My  mother  and  aunt  have  been  cooking  all  week.  I  hope  you’re hungry.” 

“Something smells wonderful,” she said. “Is everyone in the kitchen?” 

Phoebe smoothed her navy pleated skirt. 

“Yes. I mean, sorry, no. Etsuko couldn’t be here today. She’s very sad to miss you. She asked me to apologize.” 

Phoebe nodded, glancing briefly at Solomon. It seemed impolite for her to ask where Etsuko was, but she couldn’t understand why Solomon didn’t ask  his  father  where  she  was.  Phoebe  was  curious  about  Etsuko.  She  was the only person Phoebe couldn’t speak to directly, because neither woman spoke the other’s language. Also, she wanted to meet Hana, who was never around. 

Solomon grabbed Phoebe’s hand and led her to the kitchen. Around his family,  he  felt  younger  than  usual,  almost  giddy.  The  scents  of  all  his favorite  dishes  filled  the  wide  hallway  connecting  the  front  of  the  house with the kitchen. 

“Solomon  is  here!”  he  shouted,  no  different  than  when  he’d  come  home from school as a boy. 

Kyunghee  and  Sunja  stopped  their  work  immediately  and  looked  up, beaming. Mozasu smiled, seeing their happiness. 

“Phoebe is here, too, Solomon!” Kyunghee said. She wiped her hands on her apron, then came out from behind the thick marble counter to embrace him. 

Sunja followed her and put her arm around Phoebe’s waist. Sunja was a head shorter than Phoebe. 

“This  is  for  both  of  you.”  Phoebe  gave  her  a  box  of  candy  from  the Tokyo branch of an exclusive French chocolate shop. 

Sunja smiled. “Thank you.” 

Kyunghee untied the ribbon to take a peek. It was a large box of glazed fruits dipped in chocolate. Delighted, she said, “This looks expensive. You kids should be saving money at your age. But the candies look so delicious! 

Thank you.” 

She inhaled the chocolate aroma dramatically. 

“It’s so good to have you here,” Sunja said in Korean, folding Phoebe’s slender shoulders into her thick embrace. 

Phoebe loved being with Solomon’s family. It was much smaller than her own,  but  everyone  seemed  closer,  as  if  each  member  were  organically attached to one seamless body, whereas her enormous extended family felt like cheerfully mismatched Lego bricks in a large bucket. Phoebe’s parents had at least five or six siblings each, and she had grown up with well over a dozen  cousins  just  in  California.  There  were  relatives  in  New  York,  New Jersey,  DC,  Washington  State,  and  Toronto.  She  had  dated  a  couple  of Korean  American  guys  and  had  met  their  families,  but  Solomon’s  family was  different.  Solomon’s  family  was  warm  but  far  more  muted  and intensely watchful. None of them seemed to miss anything. 

“Is  that  for   pajeon?”  Phoebe  asked.  The  mixing  bowl  was  filled  with creamy  pancake  batter  flecked  with  thin  slices  of  scallion  and  chunks  of scallops. 

“You like  pajeon?  So  does  Solomon!  How  does  your   umma  make  it?” 

Kyunghee  asked;  her  tone  was  casual,  though  she  held  strong  opinions about the ratio of scallions to shellfish. 

“My  mother  doesn’t  cook,”  Phoebe  said,  looking  only  a  little embarrassed. 

“What?” Kyunghee gasped in horror and turned to Sunja, who raised her eyebrows, sharing her sister-in-law’s surprise. 

Phoebe laughed. 

“I  grew  up  eating  pizza  and  hamburgers.  And  lots  of  Kentucky  Fried Chicken. I love the KFC corn on the cob.” She smiled. “Mom worked in my dad’s medical office as his office manager and was never home before eight o’clock.” 

The women nodded, trying to understanding this. 

“Mom  was  always  working.  She  did  all  the  medical  paperwork  at  the dining table next to us kids while we did our homework. I don’t think she ever went to bed until midnight—” 

“But you didn’t eat any Korean food?” 

Kyunghee couldn’t comprehend this. 

“On the weekends we ate it. At a restaurant.” 

The women understood that the mother was busy and hardworking, but it

seemed  inconceivable  to  them  that  a  Korean  mother  didn’t  cook  for  her family. What would Solomon eat if he married this girl? What would their children eat? 

“She  didn’t  have  time.  That  makes  sense,  but  does  your  mother  know how to cook?” Kyunghee asked tentatively. 

“She never learned. And none of her sisters cook Korean food, either.” 

Phoebe laughed, because the fact that none of them cooked Korean food was  a  point  of  pride.  Her  mother  and  her  sisters  tended  to  look  down  at women who cooked a lot and constantly tried to make you eat. The four of them were very thin. Like Phoebe, they were the kind of women who were constantly moving around and seemed uninterested in eating because they were  so  absorbed  in  their  work.  “My  favorite  aunt  cooks  only  on  the weekends and only for dinner parties. She usually makes Italian food. Our family always meets at restaurants.” 

Phoebe  found  it  amusing  to  see  their  continuing  shock  and  disbelief  at such a mundane detail of her childhood. What was the big deal? Why did women have to cook, anyway? she wondered. Her mother was her favorite person  in  the  world.  “My  brother  and  sisters  don’t  even  like  kimchi.  My mother won’t even keep it in the refrigerator because of the smell.” 

“Waaah,”  Sunja  sighed.  “You  really  are  American.  Are  your  aunts married to Americans?” 

“My  aunts  and  uncles  are  married  to  non-Koreans.  My  brother  and sisters  married  ethnically  Korean  people,  but  they’re  Americans  like  me. 

My  older  brother-in-law,  the  lawyer,  speaks  fluent  Portuguese  but  no Korean; he grew up in Brazil. America is full of people like that.” 

“Really?” Kyunghee exclaimed. 

“Who are your aunts married to?” 

“I  have  aunts  and  uncles  by  marriage  who  are  white,  black,  Dutch, Jewish, Filipino, Mexican, Chinese, Puerto Rican, and, let’s see, there’s one Korean American uncle and three Korean American aunts. I have a lot of cousins.  Everyone’s  mixed,”  she  added,  smiling  at  the  older  women wearing  spotless  white  aprons,  who  were  paying  such  careful  attention  to what she was saying that it looked as if their minds were taking notes. 

“When we get together, like on Thanksgiving and Christmas, it’s really fun.” 

“I’ve met several of them,” Solomon said, worried that his grandmother

and great-aunt wouldn’t approve of her family, although he could tell they were more curious than reproachful. Neither of them had ever said that he had  to  marry  a  Korean  person,  but  he  knew  his  father’s  relationship  with Etsuko made them uncomfortable. 

When  the  frying  pan  was  hot  enough,  Sunja  poured  a  scant  cup  of  the scallion pancake batter into it. She checked the edges and lowered the heat. 

Phoebe was lively and good for the boy, she thought. Her mother used to say a woman’s life was suffering, but that was the last thing she wanted for this  sweet  girl  who  had  a  quick,  warm  smile  for  everyone.  If  she  didn’t cook,  then  so  what?  If  she  took  good  care  of  Solomon,  then  nothing  else should matter, though she hoped that Phoebe wanted children. Lately, Sunja wanted  to  hold  babies.  How  wonderful  it  would  be  not  to  have  to  worry about a war or having enough food to eat, or finding shelter. Solomon and Phoebe wouldn’t have to labor the way she and Kyunghee had, but could just enjoy their children. 

“When are you going to marry Solomon?” Sunja asked, without shifting her focus from the frying pan. An older woman had a right to ask this sort of thing, though she was still a little afraid to do it. 

“Yes, when are you two getting married? What are you waiting for? My sister and I have nothing to do—we’ll move to Tokyo if you want help with the babies and the cooking!” Kyunghee giggled. 

Solomon shook his head and smiled at the three women. 

“And this is when I go to the den and talk man stuff with Dad.” 

“Thanks  a  lot,  Solomon,”  Phoebe  said.  She  didn’t  actually  mind  their questions, since she had been wondering about this, too. 

Mozasu smiled, and the men left them in the kitchen. 

Father and son sat down in the armchairs in the center of the large room. 

Baskets  of  fruits  and  bowls  of  nuts  topped  the  glass  and  stainless-steel coffee table opposite the long low-back sofa. A stack of today’s Korean and Japanese newspapers remained half-read. 

Mozasu turned on the television and lowered the volume on the news; he was  scanning  the  ticker  running  across  the  screen  with  stock  prices.  The two often talked with the television on. 

“How’s work?” Mozasu asked. 

“Much easier than school. The boss is really great—a Japanese guy, but he went to college and business school in California.” 

“California? Your mother would’ve liked that,” Mozasu said quietly. The boy resembled her so much, especially around the brow and nose. 

“Where’s Etsuko?” Solomon stared at the blue background of the news screen.  The  newscasters  were  talking  about  a  flood  in  Bangkok.  “Is  it Hana? She okay?” 

Mozasu sighed. “Etsuko will fill you in. Give her a call.” 

Solomon wanted to know more, but his father didn’t know about what had happened between the two of them. Mozasu never liked to talk about Hana, because she upset Etsuko so much. 

“Your  grandmother  and  great-aunt  like  Phoebe.  They  want  you  to  get married.” 

“Yes, I heard that. Five minutes ago.” 

Mozasu faced his son. “Does Phoebe want to live in Japan?” 

“Not sure. She hates that she doesn’t know Japanese.” 

“She can learn.” 

Solomon looked doubtful. “She wants to work. It’s not easy to get your career  going  straight  out  of  college  in  Japan.  And  she  doesn’t  have  the language skills. Staying home is not good for Phoebe.” 

Mozasu nodded. Solomon’s mother had been the same way. 

“You okay with money?” 

“Yes, Dad,” he replied, almost amused by his father’s concern, “I have a good  job  now.  Hey,  Dad,  do  you  know  an  older  lady  named  Sonoko Matsuda? She owns an old textile factory in Yokohama. Not far from Goro-san’s place.” 

“No.” Mozasu shook his head. “Why?” 

“Kazu, my boss, is trying to finalize this real estate transaction, and the lady,  Matsuda-san,  won’t  sell  her  property.  It’s  holding  up  the  deal.  I thought  maybe  you  might  know  someone.  You  know  a  lot  of  people  in Yokohama, I mean.” 

“I  don’t  know  her,  but  sure,  I  can  find  out.  That’s  not  hard,”  he  said. 

“Your boss wants the lady to sell?” 

“Yeah.  Her  lot  is  the  last  important  piece  for  the  golf  course development.” 

“Huh, okay. That sort of thing does happen. I’ll ask Goro-san or Haruki. 

One of them will know. Goro just sold his last pachinko parlor. Now he’s only doing demolition, construction, and real estate. He wants me to go in with  him,  but  I’m  too  busy.  It’s  too  late  for  me  to  start  something  new.  I don’t understand his business as well as pachinko.” 

“Why  don’t  you  sell  the  shops,  too,  Dad?  Retire  maybe.  You’re  set, right? Pachinko is a lot of work.” 

“What? Quit the business? Pachinko put food on the table and sent you to school. I’m too young to retire!” 

He shrugged. 

“And  what  would  happen  if  I  sell  my  stores?  They  might  fire  my workers. And where would my older workers go? And we give work to the people who make the machines. Pachinko’s a bigger business in Japan than car manufacturing.” 

Mozasu  stopped  talking  and  raised  the  volume  on  the  news.  The newscasters were now talking about the value of the yen. 

Solomon nodded and stared at the screen, trying to pay attention to the currency news. His father didn’t seem the least bit embarrassed by what he did for a living. 

Mozasu caught a glimpse of his son’s darkened expression. 

“I’ll  call  Goro  tonight  and  ask  about  the  lady.  Your  boss  wants  her  to sell, right?” 

“That would be great. Thanks, Dad.” 

On Monday afternoon, Mozasu called Solomon at the office. He had spoken to  Goro-san.  The  old  lady  was  Korean—an  old-school  Chongryon  type whose children had returned to Pyongyang and died there; Matsuda was her tsumei.  She  didn’t  want  to  sell  the  property  to  the  Japanese.  Goro-san thought the old lady was being stubborn; he said he could buy the property from the lady, because she said he’d sell it to her. Then he’d sell it to Kazu’s client for the same price. 

After Solomon got off the phone, he rushed to Kazu’s office to tell him the good news. 

Kazu listened carefully, then folded his hands together and smiled. 

“Excellent work, Jedi. I can always spot a winner.” 

19

Tokyo, 1989

Even in her condition, Hana could not keep from flirting. 

“You  shouldn’t  have  come,”  she  said.  “I  look  ugly.  I  wanted  to  be beautiful when you saw me again.” 

“I wanted to see you,” Solomon replied. “And you are lovely, Hana. That will  never  change.”  He  smiled,  suppressing  his  shock  at  her  altered appearance. Etsuko had warned him, but still, it was difficult to recognize her original features beneath the reddish scabs and sparse hair. The skeleton of her body made a distinct impression through the thin blue hospital sheet. 

“Mama  said  you  brought  the  girlfriend-o  all  the  way  to  Tokyo,”  Hana said. Only her voice had not changed. It was difficult to know if she was teasing or not. “And I thought you were coming back to me. You will marry her,  nee? Of course, I will try to forgive you because I know you loved me first.” 

With the curtain drawn, the ceiling lamp off, and only the light coming from  the  low-wattage  electric  bulb  by  her  bedside,  the  room  at  the  clinic was dark like night even though it was sunny outside. 

“When are you going to get better?” he asked. 

“Come here, Solomon.” Hana raised her right arm, stick thin and chalky. 

She waved it like an elegant wand of death. “I have missed you so much. If I’d never left you that summer…Well, I would have made you marry me. I would have ruined you, though—I ruin everything. I ruin everything.” 

Solomon sat on the hard chair by her bed. None of the medications was working,  Etsuko  had  told  him.  The  doctors  said  there  were  only  a  few weeks  or  perhaps  two  months  left  at  best.  Dark  lesions  covered  her  neck and  shoulders.  Her  left  hand  was  unblemished,  but  her  right  was  dry  like her face. Her physical beauty had once been so extraordinary that it seemed to him that her current state was particularly cruel. 

“Hana-chan,  why  can’t  you  go  to  America  to  see  the  doctors  there? 

There have been so many advances in the States. I know things are much better there for this—” He didn’t want to play this stupid game where they wouldn’t talk about what was real. Just hearing her voice and sitting in her room where she couldn’t float away from him reminded him of everything magical and shining about her. He had been in her thrall, and oddly, even now, he felt so many things. He could not imagine her dying. He wanted to pick  her  up  and  spirit  her  away  to  New  York.  In  America,  everything seemed fixable, and in Japan, difficult problems were to be endured.  Sho ga nai,   sho ga nai. How many times had he heard these words?  It cannot be helped.  His mother had apparently hated that expression, and suddenly he understood her rage against this cultural resignation that violated her beliefs and wishes. 

“Oh, Solomon. I don’t want to go to America.” Hana exhaled loudly. “I don’t want to live. I’m ready to die. You know? Do you ever want to die, Solomon? I’ve wanted to die for so many years, but I was too cowardly to say it or to do anything to make my wish come true. Maybe you could have saved  me,  but  you  know,  even  wonderful  you,  even  you,  my  Solomon,  I don’t think so. Everyone wants to die sometimes,  nee?” 

“That  spring.  When  you  left.  I  wanted  to  die.”  Solomon  grew  quiet, never  having  admitted  this  to  anyone.  Sometimes  he’d  forget  about  that time, but being with her made the memory sharp and mean. 

Hana frowned and began to cry. 

“If  I  had  stayed,  we  would’ve  loved  each  other  too  much,  and  I  felt certain that I would hurt you. You see, I’m not a good person, and you are a good  person.  You  shouldn’t  be  with  me.  It’s  simple.  Mama  said  you  got tested in America for your life insurance and that you are okay. I’m grateful for  this.  You’re  the  only  person  I  have  never  ever  wanted  to  hurt.  And Mama told me that your girlfriend-o is a nice girl and educated like you. I don’t want to know if she is pretty. Tell me she’s hideous but has a good

soul. I do know that she is a Korean girl.  Tsugoi, Solomon. How amazing. 

You  should  marry  her.  Maybe  people  should  marry  from  the  same background.  Maybe  life  is  easier  then.  I  am  going  to  imagine  you  having three or four beautiful Korean children—with lovely Korean skin and hair. 

You  have  such  wonderful  hair,  Solomon.  I  would  have  liked  to  have  met your mother. Name one of your little girls after me,  nee? Because you see, I will not have any. Promise me you will love little Hana, and you will think of me.” 

“Shut  up,”  he  said  quietly,  knowing  she’d  never  listen.  “Please,  please shut up.” 

“You know that you’re the one I loved.  Hatsukoi was such a stupid idea to me until I met you. I’ve been with so many men, Solomon, and they were disgusting. All the filthy things I let them do. I’m so sorry for all of it. You, I loved, because you are good.” 

“Hana, you are good.” 

She shook her head, but for a moment she looked peaceful. 

“I did bad things with boys after Mama left. That’s why I came to Tokyo. 

I was so angry when I met you, then when I was with you, I stopped being so  upset.  But  I  couldn’t  handle  it  so  I  left  and  started  hostessing.  I  didn’t want  to  love  anybody.  Then  you  went  to  America,  and  I  was,  I  was—” 

Hana paused. “When I was drinking a lot, I thought you would look for me. 

Like in that American movie. I thought you would find where I lived, climb on a ladder up to the window, and carry me away. I used to tell all the girls that you would get me. All the girls wanted you to come for me.” 

Solomon stared at her mouth as she spoke. She had the prettiest mouth. 

“It’s disgusting, isn’t it?” 

“What?” He felt like someone had slapped him. 

“This.” She pointed to the lesions on her chin. 

“No. I wasn’t looking at that.” 

She didn’t believe him. Her eyes fluttered lightly, and Hana leaned back into the pillow. 

“I want to rest now, Solomon. Will you come back soon?” 

“Yes, I’ll come back,” he said, rising from the chair. 

When he returned to his desk, Solomon could not stop thinking about her. 

Why  hadn’t  Etsuko  helped  her?  Something  inside  him  hurt,  and  the  ache felt  familiar.  He  could  not  read  the  documents  in  front  of  him.  He  was supposed  to  run  through  some  projections  for  the  golf  club  project,  but  it was as if he had forgotten how to use Excel. What would have happened if she had not left him that summer? Would he have been able to go to New York and stay away for so long? 

Phoebe wanted to marry him now; he knew this, but she never brought it up because she was a proud person and wanted to be asked. When he heard Kazu’s  voice  in  the  hallway,  Solomon  looked  up  to  see  his  boss  standing before him. Solomon’s office mates were out; Kazu closed the door behind him,  walked  over  to  the  credenza  near  Solomon’s  desk,  and  stood  in  the space between the credenza and the enormous window. 

“She’s dead,” Kazu said. 

“What? I just saw her.” 

“Who?” 

“Hana. Did my father call you?” 

“I don’t know who that is, man, but Matsuda-san, the old lady, is dead, and  it  doesn’t  look  good.  When  the  client  wanted  the  property,  he  didn’t expect that the holdout seller would die a few days afterwards.” 

“What?” Solomon blinked. “The seller is dead?” 

“Yes.  She  sold  the  property  to  your  father’s  friend  Goro-san,  then  our client  bought  the  property  from  him.  Our  client  is  not  in  trouble,  but  it smells bad. Do you know what I mean?” Kazu said this in a flat, calm voice while  staring  at  Solomon’s  face  thoughtfully.  He  picked  up  the  Hanshin Tigers baseball on the credenza, tossed it up and caught it. 

“How did she die?” 

“Not sure. It could have been a heart attack or a stroke. They don’t know. 

There  are  two  nieces  apparently.  I  don’t  know  if  they’re  going  to  make  a fuss or what the police might do.” 

“She could have died of natural causes. Wasn’t she old?” 

“Yes, I expect that could be true; however, our client has canceled this transaction for now because the news could affect their public offering next spring.” 

“What public offering?” 

“Never mind that.” Kazu sighed. “Listen, man, I have to let you go. I am

sorry, Solomon. I really am.” 

“What? What did I do?” 

“We have to do this. There’s no other way. I think your father’s friend responded a bit too enthusiastically about the land sale,  nee?” 

“But  you  have  no  proof,  and  you  are  accusing  my  father’s  friend  of something impossible. Goro would never ever do anything to hurt—” 

“I’m not accusing your father’s friend of anything. But the facts remain that there is a dead woman who didn’t want to sell her property. Everyone knew she wouldn’t sell, and moments after she sold, she died.” 

“But Goro paid a lot of money for that property; it was fair market value; and  he’s  Korean.  She  didn’t  mind  selling  it  to  a  Korean.  I  thought  that’s how we were supposed to get around her refusal. He wouldn’t have killed an old woman for something like this. All his life, he’s helped all these poor people. What are you saying? Goro did this as a favor for my father and me

—” 

Kazu held the ball between his hands and looked down at the carpet. 

“Solly,  don’t  tell  me  anything  more.  Do  you  understand?  The investigators  are  going  to  want  to  know  what  happened.  They  may  not make  a  big  deal  of  it,  but  the  client  is  very  spooked,  dude.  The  client wanted to develop a country club; they weren’t looking for a run-in with the yaks.  Do  you  know  what  kind  of  hell  they  can  raise  in  shareholder meetings?” 

“Yaks? Goro is not yakuza.” 

Kazu nodded and tossed the ball again and caught it. 

“The transaction is unfortunately contaminated, so it will be put on hold. 

This comes at a great financial cost to the client, and it looks poorly for us as a premiere banking company. My reputation—” 

“But the client got the property.” 

“Yes, but no one was supposed to die. I didn’t wish for that.” Kazu made a face like he was tasting something sour. 

Solomon  shook  his  head.  All  he  could  think  of  were  the  innumerable times he had spent in Goro’s presence listening to his hilarious stories about his many girlfriends and his constant encouragements for Solomon’s future. 

Goro had this remarkable clarity about the world. A great man, his father always  said  about  Goro—a  noble  man—a  true   bushi  who  understood sacrifice  and  leadership.  It  had  been  Goro  alone  who  had  built  up  Haruki

Totoyama’s mother’s uniform business from nothing, and all because he’d felt bad for a single mother raising two boys. His father said that Goro was always doing good things for poor people quietly. It was absurd to consider that  Goro  could  have  been  responsible  for  the  lady’s  death.  The  woman would  have  sold  the  property  to  Goro  because  he  was  known  as  a  good Korean businessman. Everyone knew this. 

“Human Resources is waiting outside. Solomon, you don’t know how it works,  I  don’t  think,  because  this  is  your  first  job  at  a  bank,  but  when you’re terminated from an investment bank, you have to leave the building immediately for internal security reasons. I’m sorry.” 

“But what did I do?” 

“The transaction is postponed for now, and we will not need such a large team.  I’m  pleased  to  give  you  a  reference.  You  can  put  me  down  for whatever you want. I would never mention this to your future employers.” 

Solomon leaned back in his chair and stared at Kazu’s hardened jaw. He paused before speaking:

“You  brought  me  in  on  purpose.  Because  you  wanted  me  to  get  the Korean lady to sell. You knew—” 

Kazu put down the baseball and moved to the door. 

“Brother, I gave you a job, and you were fortunate to have it.” 

Solomon covered his mouth with his hands. 

“You’re a nice boy, Solomon, and you will have a future in finance, but not  here.  If  you  are  trying  to  imply  that  you  were  being  discriminated against, something that Koreans tend to believe, that would be incorrect and unfair to me. If anything, you have been preferred over the natives. I like working  with  Koreans.  Everyone  knows  this  about  me.  The  whole department  thought  that  you  were  my  pet  associate.  I  didn’t  want  to  fire you. I just don’t agree with your father’s tactics.” 

“My father? He had nothing to do with this.” 

“Yes, of course. It was this man, Goro,” Kazu said. “I believe you. I do. 

Good luck, Solomon.” 

Kazu  opened  the  office  door  and  let  the  two  women  from  Human Resources in before heading to his next meeting. 

The  speech  from  HR  passed  quickly,  sounding  like  radio  static  in Solomon’s head. They asked him for his identification card, and he gave it to them automatically. His mind kept returning to Hana, though he felt like he  should  call  Phoebe  to  explain.  He  needed  air.  He  threw  things  in  the white banker’s box but left the baseball on the credenza. 

The HR women escorted him to the elevator and offered to send his box to  his  apartment  by  messenger,  but  Solomon  refused.  Through  the  glass-walled conference room, he saw the guys from the poker game but no Kazu. 

Giancarlo spotted him holding the white box against his chest, and he half smiled at him, then returned to what he was doing. On the street, Solomon got into a taxi and asked the driver to drive him all the way to Yokohama. 

He didn’t think he could walk to the train station. 

20

Yokohama, 1989

Empire Cafe was an old-style Japanese curry restaurant near Chinatown—

a place Solomon used to go with his father on Saturday afternoons when he was a boy. Mozasu still ate there on Wednesdays with Goro and Totoyama. 

Empire  served  five  different  kinds  of  curries,  only  one  kind  of  draft  beer, and as much tea and pickles as you wanted. The cook, who was always in a bad  mood,  had  a  deft  hand  with  the  seasonings,  and  his  curries  were unrivaled in the city. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  and  long  past  lunch  hour,  the  café  was  nearly empty  except  for  the  three  old  friends  sitting  at  the  corner  table  near  the kitchen. Goro was telling one of his funny stories while making clownish faces and dramatic hand gestures. Mozasu and Totoyama took bites of their hot curry and sipped beer. All the while, they nodded and smiled at Goro, encouraging him to continue. 

When  Solomon  pushed  open  the  perpetually  swollen  front  door,  the cheap sleigh bells attached to the door jingled. 

Scarcely  bothering  to  turn  from  clearing  the  tables,  the  diminutive waitress bellowed, “Irasshai!” 

Mozasu was surprised to see his son. Solomon bowed in the direction of the men. 

“You  skipping  work?”  Mozasu  asked.  The  edge  of  his  eyes  crinkled deeply when he smiled. 

“Good, good. Skip work,” Goro interrupted. He was delighted to see the boy. “I hear you go to the office on the weekends, too. That’s no way to be for  a  handsome  boy  like  you.  You  should  be  busy  chasing  skirt.  If  I  had your height and your diploma, you’d feel sorry for all the women of Japan. 

I’d be breaking hearts at a rate that would shock a gentle boy like you.” 

Goro rubbed his hands together. 

Totoyama  said  nothing;  he  was  staring  at  the  lower  half  of  Solomon’s face, which seemed fixed; the boy’s lips made a thin, crumpled line above his chin. Totoyama’s own face was flushed, since it took only half a small beer to redden his ears, nose, and cheeks. 

“Solomon, sit down,” Totoyama said. “You okay?” 

He lifted his briefcase resting on the empty chair and set it down on the linoleum floor. 

“I—” Solomon tried to speak, then gasped. 

Mozasu asked his son, “You hungry? Did Etsuko tell you that you’d find us here gossiping like old women?” 

He shook his head no. 

Mozasu laid his hand on the boy’s forearm. He’d bought the dark blue suit Solomon was wearing now from Brooks Brothers the time he’d visited Solomon in New York. It had been a nice feeling to be able to buy his son however many interview suits and whatever else he needed at such a nice American store. That was the whole point of money, wasn’t it, to be able to get your kid whatever he needed? 

“Have some curry,” Mozasu said. 

Solomon shook his head. 

Goro frowned and waved the waitress over. 

“Kyoko-chan, give the boy some tea, please.” 

Solomon looked up and stared at his father’s former boss. 

“I don’t know what to say, Goro-san.” 

“Sure, you do. Just talk.” 

“My boss, Kazu, said that the lady, you know, the seller, she died. Is that right?” 

“That’s so. I went to the funeral,” Goro said. “She was ancient. Died of a heart  attack.  She  had  two  nieces  who  inherited  all  that  money.  Pleasant girls. One married and one divorced. Beautiful skin. Nice, open brows. Real Korean faces. They reminded me of my mother and aunt.” 

The  waitress  brought  his  tea,  and  Solomon  held  the  brown,  squat  mug between his hands. These were the same mugs that Empire had used ever since he could remember. 

Totoyama patted the boy’s shoulder gently as if to wake him. 

“Who? Who died?” 

“The  lady.  The  Korean  lady  who  sold  the  property  to  Goro-san.  My boss’s client wanted this property, and the lady wouldn’t sell to a Japanese, so Goro-san bought it and sold it to the client, but the lady is dead now, and the  boss’s  client  won’t  touch  the  deal.  Something  about  having  a  clean public offering and possible investigations.” 

Totoyama glanced at Mozasu, who looked equally puzzled. 

“She died? Is that so?” Mozasu glanced at Goro, who nodded calmly. 

“She was ninety-three years old, and she died a couple of days after she sold her property to me. What does that have to do with anything?” Goro shrugged.  He  winked  at  the  waitress  and  tapped  the  edge  of  his  mug  for another  beer.  When  he  pointed  to  the  empty  beer  mugs  of  Mozasu  and Totoyama, the men shook their heads. Totoyama covered the top of his beer mug with his hand. 

“What did you pay for the property?” Mozasu asked. 

“A very good price, but not crazy. Then I sold it to that client for exactly what I paid for it. I sent Solomon’s boss the copies of the contract. I didn’t make a single yen. This was Solomon’s first deal, and—” 

Mozasu and Totoyama nodded. It was unthinkable that Goro would ever seek to profit from Solomon’s career. 

“The client bought it for less than what he would have if he’d bought it himself,” Solomon said slowly, as if Kazu were in the room. 

“The  client  got  a  piece  of  property  that  he  would  never  have  gotten because he’s Japanese, and she had refused on several occasions to sell to him.  He  got  it  cheap.”  Goro  grunted  in  disbelief.  “So  now  the  client  is saying he won’t build the country club? Bullshit.” 

“Kazu said the project will be on hold because they didn’t want the bad news contaminating the public offering.” 

“What bad news? The old lady died in peace. Though it might take time to wash away that dirty Korean smell,” Goro said. “I’m sick of this.” 

Totoyama frowned. “If there had been something questionable about her death, I would know. There’s been no complaint.” 

“Listen, the deal’s done. If this little prick wants to cheat you out of your cut, fine. I didn’t expect him to give you a fair bonus, but remember this: That bastard will not profit from you again. I will watch that motherfucker until the day I die.” Goro inhaled, then calmly smiled at the boy. 

“Now,  Solomon,  you  should  eat  some  curry  and  tell  me  about  this American  girl,  Phoebe.  I’ve  always  wanted  to  go  to  America  to  meet  the women  there.  So  beautiful,  so  beautiful.”  He  smacked  his  lips.  “I  want  a blonde American girlfriend with a big ass!” 

The  men  smiled  but  they  didn’t  laugh  as  they  would  have  before. 

Solomon appeared unconsoled. 

The  waitress  brought  Goro  a  small  beer  and  returned  to  the  kitchen; Goro watched her walk away. 

“Too skinny,” he said, smoothing back his dyed black pompadour with his brown hands. 

“I was fired,” Solomon said. 

“Nani?” the three men said at once. “For what?” 

“Kazu said that the client is holding off on the deal. They don’t need me anymore. He said that if there was an investigation because of—” Solomon stopped  himself  before  saying  the  word  “yakuza,”  because  suddenly,  he wasn’t sure. His father wouldn’t have associated with criminals. Should he be  speaking  like  this  in  front  of  Totoyama?  He  was  Japanese  and  a  high-ranking  detective  with  the  Yokohama  police;  he  wouldn’t  be  friends  with criminals. The suggestion alone would have hurt all the men deeply. 

Goro studied Solomon’s face and nodded almost imperceptibly, because he understood the boy’s silence. 

“Was she cremated?” Totoyama asked. 

“Probably, but some Koreans get buried back home,” Mozasu said. 

“Soo nee,” Totoyama said. 

“Solomon,  the  lady  died  of  natural  causes.  The  niece  said  it  was  the heart. She was ninety-three years old. I had nothing to do with her death. 

Listen, your boss doesn’t actually think I killed the old lady. If he did, he’d be too scared to fire you. What would keep me from killing him? This is crazy stuff from television. He used your connections, then he fired you by making  up  some  excuse.  The  client  just  wanted  the  Korean  shit  to  go away.” 

“You’ll get a better job in finance. I’m sure of it,” Mozasu said. 

Goro was visibly irritated, however. “You should never work for a dirty bank again.” 

“Iie. Solomon majored in economics. He studied in America to work in an American bank.” 

“Travis is a British bank,” Solomon said. 

“Well,  maybe  that  was  the  problem.  Maybe  you  should  work  in  an American  bank.  There  are  a  lot  of  American  investment  banks,  nee?” 

Mozasu said. 

Solomon felt awful. The men at this table had raised him. He could see how upset they were. 

“Don’t worry about me. I’ll get another job. I have savings, too. I better go now.” Solomon stood up from his seat. “Papa, I left a box at your office. 

Can you send it to me in Tokyo? Nothing important.” 

Mozasu nodded. 

“Here, why don’t I take you home? We can take a drive to Tokyo.” 

“No,  it’s  okay.  I’ll  catch  the  train.  It’s  faster.  Phoebe  is  probably wondering about me.” 

When she didn’t answer the phone, Solomon returned to the hospital. Hana was awake. Pop music played on the radio. The room was still dark, but the dance hit made the room feel lively, like a nightclub. 

“You came back already? You must have really missed me, Solomon.” 

He told her everything, and she listened without interrupting him. 

“You should take over your father’s business.” 

“Pachinko?” 

“Yes, pachinko. Why not? All these idiots who say bad things about it are jealous. Your father is an honest person. He could be richer if he was crooked, but he’s rich enough. Goro is a good guy, too. He might be a yak, but who cares? I don’t. And if he isn’t, I’m sure he knows them all. It’s a filthy world, Solomon. No one is clean. Living makes you dirty. I’ve met plenty  of  fancy  people  from  IBJ  and  the  BOJ  who  are  from  the  best families, and they like to do some sick shit in bed. A lot of them do very bad  things  in  business,  but  they  don’t  get  caught.  Most  of  the  ones  I’ve fucked would steal if they had the chance. They’re too scared to have any

real ambition. Listen, Solomon, nothing will ever change here. Do you see that?” 

“What do you mean?” 

“You’re a fool,” she said, laughing, “but you are my fool.” 

Her teasing made him feel sad. He missed her already. Solomon couldn’t remember ever feeling this lonesome before. 

“Japan  will  never  change.  It  will  never  ever  integrate  gaijin,  and  my darling,  here  you  will  always  be  a  gaijin  and  never  Japanese.  Nee?  The zainichi can’t leave,  nee? But it’s not just you. Japan will never take people like my mother back into society again; it will never take back people like me. And we’re Japanese! I’m diseased. I got this from some Japanese guy who owned an old trading company. He’s dead now. But nobody cares. The doctors here, even, they just want me to go away. So listen, Solomon, you should  stay  here  and  not  go  back  to  the  States,  and  you  should  take  over your papa’s business. Become so rich that you can do whatever you want. 

But,  my  beautiful  Solomon,  they’re  never  going  to  think  we’re  okay.  Do you know what I mean?” Hana stared at him. “Do what I tell you to do.” 

“My own father doesn’t want that. Even Goro-san sold his parlors and is doing real estate now. Papa wanted me to work in an American investment bank.” 

“What, so you can be like Kazu? I know a thousand Kazus. They’re not fit to wipe your father’s ass.” 

“There are good people in the banks, too.” 

“And there are good people in pachinko, too. Like your father.” 

“I didn’t know you liked Papa.” 

“You  know,  after  I  got  here,  he  visited  me  every  Sunday  when  Mama needed a break. Sometimes, when I was pretending to be asleep, I’d catch him  praying  for  me  in  that  chair.  I  don’t  believe  in  God,  but  I  guess  that doesn’t matter. I never had someone pray for me before, Solomon.” 

Solomon closed his eyes and nodded. 

“Your  grandmother  Sunja  and  great-aunt  Kyunghee  visit  me  on Saturdays.  Did  you  know  that?  They  pray  for  me,  too.  I  don’t  understand the  Jesus  stuff,  but  it’s  something  holy  to  have  people  touch  you  when you’re  sick.  The  nurses  here  are  afraid  to  touch  me.  Your  grandmother Sunja holds my hands, and your great-aunt Kyunghee puts cool towels on my head when I get too hot. They’re kind to me, though I’m a bad person

—” 

“You’re not bad. That’s not true.” 

“I’ve  done  terrible  things,”  she  said  drily.  “Solomon,  when  I  was  a hostess,  I  sold  drugs  to  one  girl  who  ended  up  overdosing.  I  stole  money from a lot of men. I’ve told so many lies.” 

Solomon said nothing. 

“I deserve this.” 

“No. It’s a virus. Everybody gets sick.” 

Solomon smoothed her brow and kissed it. 

“That’s okay, Solomon. I’m not doing bad things anymore. I’ve had time to think about my stupid life.” 

“Hana—” 

“I know, Solomon.  Otomodachi,   nee?” 

She pretended to bow formally as she was lying down, and she picked up the corner of her blanket as if she were holding a fold of her skirt to curtsey. 

The trace of flirtation remained in her still-lithe movements. He wanted to remember this little thing forever. 

“Go home, Solomon.” 

“Okay,” he said, and he did not see her again. 

21

Tokyo, 1989

I never liked him,” Phoebe said. “Too smooth.” 

“Well, I’m obviously an idiot, because I did,” Solomon said. “Besides, how in the world did you get that impression of Kazu in the little time you had?  You  met  him  for  about  two  minutes  when  we  ran  into  him  at Mitsukoshi. And you’ve never mentioned this before.” 

Slumped  in  the  rented  leather  armchair,  Solomon  could  barely  face Phoebe. He wasn’t sure what kind of reaction he’d expected from her, but he was surprised by how unruffled she was by the news. She seemed almost pleased. Phoebe sat on the bench near the window with her folded knees to her chest. 

“I actually liked him,” he said. 

“Solomon, that guy screwed you.” 

Solomon  glanced  up  at  her  placid  profile,  then  dropped  his  head  back again on the back of the armchair. 

“He’s a dick.” 

“I feel much better now.” 

“I’m on your team.” 

Phoebe didn’t know if she should get up and sit by him. She didn’t want him to think that she felt sorry for him. Her older sister used to say that men hated  pity;  rather,  they  wanted  sympathy  and  admiration—not  an  easy combination. 

“He was a phony. He talked to you like you were his little buddy. Like he’s  some  big  man  on  campus  and  you’re  one  of  his  ‘boys.’  Does  that system still even exist? I hate that frat-boy brother shit.” Phoebe rolled her eyes. 

Solomon  was  dumbstruck.  She  had  managed  to  encapsulate  his  entire relationship with Kazu from that brief, almost nonexistent encounter at the food court of the Mitsukoshi department store. How had she done this? 

Phoebe hugged her knees, lacing her fingers together. 

“You don’t like him because he’s Japanese.” 

“Don’t  get  mad  at  me.  It’s  not  that  I  distrust  the  Japanese,  but  I  don’t know if I trust them entirely. You’re going to say that I’ve been reading too much about the Pacific War. I know, I know, I sound a little bigoted.” 

“A little? The Japanese have suffered, too. Nagasaki? Hiroshima? And in America,  the  Japanese  Americans  were  sent  to  internment  camps,  but  the German Americans weren’t. How do you explain that?” 

“Solomon,  I’ve  been  here  long  enough.  Can  we  please  go  home?  You can get a dozen terrific jobs back in New York. You’re good at everything. 

No one interviews better than you.” 

“I don’t have a visa to work in the States.” 

“There are other ways to get citizenship.” She smiled. 

Solomon’s family had hinted on innumerable occasions that he wanted to marry her and that he should marry her; the only person who hadn’t said so explicitly was the man himself. 

Solomon’s head lay immobile on the back of the armchair. Phoebe could see that he was staring at the ceiling. She got up from the bench and walked to the front hall closet. She opened the closet doors and pulled out both of her  suitcases.  The  suitcase  wheels  rolled  loudly  across  the  wooden  floor, and Solomon looked up. 

“Hey, what are you doing?” 

“I’m going home,” she said. 

“Don’t be like that.” 

“Well, it occurs to me that I lost my life when I came here with you, and you’re not worth it.” 

“Why are you being like this?” 

Solomon  rose  from  his  chair  and  was  now  standing  where  she’d  been only  a  moment  ago.  Phoebe  dragged  the  suitcases  behind  her  into  the

bedroom and shut the door quietly. 

What could he say? He wouldn’t marry her. He had known it almost as soon  as  they’d  landed  in  Narita.  Her  confidence  and  self-possession  had mesmerized  him  in  college.  Her  equanimity,  which  had  seemed  so important in the States, seemed like aloofness and arrogance in Tokyo. She had  lost  her  life  here,  this  was  true,  but  marrying  her  didn’t  seem  like  a solution. 

Then  the  whole  Japan-is-evil  stuff.  Sure,  there  were  assholes  in  Japan, but there were assholes everywhere,  nee?  Ever  since  they  got  here,  either she had changed or his feelings for her had changed. Hadn’t he been leaning toward asking her to marry him? Yet now, when she put forward the idea of marrying  for  citizenship,  he  realized  that  he  didn’t  want  to  become  an American.  It  made  sense  for  him  to  do  so;  it  would  have  made  his  father happy. Was it better to be an American than a Japanese? He knew Koreans who had become naturalized Japanese, and it made sense to do so, but he didn’t  want  to  do  that  now,  either.  Maybe  one  day.  She  was  right;  it  was weird  that  he  was  born  in  Japan  and  had  a  South  Korean  passport.  He couldn’t  rule  out  getting  naturalized.  Maybe  another  Korean  wouldn’t understand that, but he didn’t care anymore. 

Kazu was a shit, but so what? He was one bad guy, and he was Japanese. 

Perhaps that was what going to school in America had taught him. Even if there were a hundred bad Japanese, if there was one good one, he refused to make a blanket statement. Etsuko was like a mother to him; his first love was Hana; and Totoyama was like an uncle, too. They were Japanese, and they were very good. She hadn’t known them the way he had; how could he expect her to understand? 

In a way, Solomon was Japanese, too, even if the Japanese didn’t think so. Phoebe couldn’t see this. There was more to being something than just blood. The space between Phoebe and him could not close, and if he was decent, he had to let her go home. 

Solomon  went  to  the  kitchen  and  made  coffee.  He  poured  two  cups  and approached the bedroom door. 

“Phoebe, may I come in?” 

“The door’s open.” 

The suitcases on the floor were brimming with clothes folded and rolled like canisters. The closets were nearly empty. Solomon’s five dark suits and half a dozen white dress shirts hung on the long rod with a yard of hanging space  left.  Her  neat  rows  of  shoes  still  took  up  most  of  the  closet  floor. 

Phoebe’s  shoes  were  black  or  brown  leather;  a  pair  of  pink  espadrilles, which had once given her terrible blisters, stood out from the others like a girlish mistake. During their junior year, they’d gone to a party, and she’d had  to  walk  back  to  the  dorm  barefoot  from  111th  Street  and  Broadway because the pink espadrilles had been too narrow. 

“Why do you still have those shoes?” 

“Shut up, Solomon.” Phoebe started to cry. 

“What did I say?” 

“I have never felt so stupid in my life. Why am I here?” She took a deep breath. 

Solomon stared at her, not knowing how to comfort her. He was afraid of her;  perhaps  he  had  always  been  afraid  of  her—her  joy,  anger,  sadness, excitement—she  had  so  many  extreme  feelings.  The  nearly  empty  room with  the  solitary  rented  bed  and  floor  lamp  seemed  to  highlight  her vividness. Back in New York, she had been spirited and wonderful. Here, Phoebe was almost too stark, awkward. 

“I’m sorry,” he said. 

“No. You’re not.” 

Solomon sat down on the carpeted floor cross-legged, leaning his long back  against  the  narrow  wall.  The  freshly  painted  walls  were  still  bare. 

They hadn’t hung anything on them because the landlord would have fined them for each nail hole. 

“I’m sorry,” he repeated. 

Phoebe  picked  up  her  espadrilles  and  threw  them  into  the  overflowing waste basket. 

“I think I’m going to work for my dad,” he said. 

“Pachinko?” 

“Yeah.” Solomon nodded to himself. It felt strange to say this out loud. 

“He asked you?” 

“No. I don’t think he wants me to.” 

She shook her head. 

“Maybe I can take over the business.” 

“You’re kidding, right?” 

“No.” 

Without  saying  a  word,  Phoebe  continued  to  pack.  She  was  willfully ignoring  him,  and  he  continued  to  look  at  her.  She  was  more  cute  than pretty,  more  pretty  than  beautiful.  He  liked  her  long  torso,  slender  neck, bobbed hair, and intelligent eyes. When she laughed at a joke, her laughter was  whole.  Nothing  seemed  to  scare  her—she  thought  anything  was possible.  Could  he  change  her  mind?  Could  he  change  his?  Maybe  the packing was just a dramatic gesture. What did he know about women? He’d known only two girls really. 

She rolled up another sweater and dropped it on the growing pile. 

“Pachinko. Well, that makes it easier then,” she said finally. “I can’t live here, Solomon. Even if you wanted to marry me, I can’t live here. I can’t breathe here.” 

“That first night we arrived, when you couldn’t read the instructions on the aspirin bottle, and you started to cry. I should have known then.” 

Phoebe  picked  up  another  sweater  and  just  stared  at  it  like  she  didn’t know what to do with it. 

“You have to dump me,” he said. 

“Yes, I do.” 

She left in the morning. It was like Phoebe to make a clean exit. Solomon took her to the airport by train, and even though they were pleasant, she had changed literally overnight. She didn’t seem sad or angry; she was cordial. 

If anything, she seemed stronger than before. She let him hug her good-bye, but they agreed not to talk for a long time. 

“It  would  be  better,”  she  said,  and  Solomon  felt  powerless  against  her decision. 

Solomon took the train to Yokohama. 

His father’s modest office was lined with gray metal shelves, and stacks of files rested on the credenzas along the walls. Three safes holding papers and

the day’s receipts were located below the high windows. Mozasu sat behind the same battered oak table that he’d used as a desk for over thirty years. 

Noa had studied for his Waseda exams at this table, and when he moved to Tokyo, he’d left it for Mozasu. 

“Papa.” 

“Solomon,” Mozasu exclaimed. “Is everything okay?” 

“Phoebe went back.” 

Saying  it  to  his  father  made  it  real.  Solomon  sat  down  on  the  empty chair. 

“What? Why? Because you lost your job?” 

“No. I can’t marry her. And I told her that I’d rather live in Japan. Work in pachinko.” 

“What? Pachinko? No, no.” Mozasu shook his head. “You’ll get another job in banking. That’s why you went to Columbia,  nee?” 

Mozasu touched his brow, genuinely confused by this announcement. 

“She’s a nice girl. I thought you’d get married.” 

Mozasu  walked  around  from  his  desk  and  handed  his  son  a  packet  of tissues. 

“Pachinko?  Honto?” 

“Yeah, why not?” Solomon blew his nose. 

“You don’t want to do this. You don’t know what people say.” 

“None of that stuff is true. You’re an honest business person. I know you pay your taxes and get all your licenses, and—” 

“Yes, yes, I do. But people will always say things. They will always say terrible things, no matter what. It’s normal for me. I’m nobody. There’s no need for you to do this work. I wasn’t smart at school like my brother. I was good at running around and fixing things. I was good at making money. I’ve always kept my business clean and stayed away from the bad things. Goro-san taught me that it’s not worth it to get involved with the bad guys. But Solomon,  this  business  is  not  easy,  nee?  It’s  not  just  tinkering  with machines  and  ordering  new  ones  and  hiring  people  to  work  on  the  floor. 

There are so many things that can go wrong. We know lots of people who went belly-up,  nee?” 

“Why don’t you want me to do this?” 

“I sent you to those American schools so that no one would—” Mozasu paused. “No one is going to look down at my son.” 

“Papa,  it  doesn’t  matter.  None  of  it  matters,  nee?”  Solomon  had  never seen his father like this before. 

“I worked and made money because I thought it would make me a man. 

I thought people would respect me if I was rich.” 

Solomon looked at him and nodded. His father rarely spent on himself, but  he  had  paid  for  weddings  and  funerals  for  employees  and  sent  tuition for their children. 

Mozasu’s face brightened suddenly. 

“You  can  change  your  mind,  Solomon.  You  can  call  Phoebe  when  she gets  home  and  say  you’re  sorry.  Your  mother  was  a  lot  like  Phoebe—

strong-willed and smart.” 

“I want to live here,” Solomon said. “She will not.” 

“Soo nee.” 

Solomon picked up the ledger from his father’s table. 

“Explain this to me, Papa.” 

Mozasu paused, then he opened the book. 

It  was  the  first  of  the  month,  and  Sunja  had  woken  up  upset.  She  had dreamed  of  Hansu  again.  Lately,  he  had  been  appearing  in  her  dreams, looking  the  way  he  did  when  she  was  a  girl,  wearing  his  white  linen  suit and white leather shoes. He always said the same thing: “You are my girl; you  are  my  dear  girl.”  Sunja  would  wake  and  feel  ashamed.  She  should have forgotten him by now. 

After  breakfast,  she  would  go  the  cemetery  to  clean  Isak’s  grave.  As usual, Kyunghee offered to come with her, but Sunja said it was okay. 

Neither  woman  performed  the   jesa.  As  Christians,  they  weren’t supposed  to  believe  in  ancestor  worship.  Nevertheless,  both  widows  still wanted  to  talk  to  their  husband  and  elders,  appeal  to  them,  seek  their counsel.  They  missed  their  old  rituals,  so  she  went  to  the  cemetery regularly.  It  was  curious,  but  Sunja  felt  close  to  Isak  in  a  way  that  she hadn’t  when  he  was  alive.  Then  she  had  been  in  awe  of  him  and  his goodness. Dead, he seemed more approachable to her. 

When  the  train  from  Yokohama  reached  Osaka  Station,  Sunja  bought ivory-colored chrysanthemums from the old Korean woman’s stall. She had

been there for years. The way Isak had explained it, when it was time to be with  the  Lord,  your  real  body  would  be  in  heaven,  so  what  happened  to your remains didn’t matter. It made no sense to bring a buried body favorite foods or incense or flowers. There was no need for bowing, since we were all  equal  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  he’d  said.  And  yet  Sunja  couldn’t  help wanting to bring something lovely to the grave. In life, he had asked for so little  from  her,  and  when  she  thought  of  him  now,  she  remembered  her husband as someone who had praised the beauty that God had made. 

She was glad that Isak had not been cremated. She had wanted a place for the boys to visit their father. Mozasu visited the grave often, and before Noa disappeared, he had come with her, too. Had they talked to him, too? 

she wondered. It had never occurred to her to ask them this, and now it was too late. 

Lately,  every  time  she  went  to  the  cemetery,  she  wondered  what  Isak would  have  thought  of  Noa’s  death.  Isak  would  have  understood  Noa’s suffering.  He  would  have  known  what  to  say  to  him.  Noa  had  been cremated by his wife, so there was no grave to visit. Sunja talked to Noa when  she  was  alone.  Sometimes,  something  very  simple  like  a  delicious piece of pumpkin taffy would make her sorry that now that she had money, she couldn’t buy him something that he had loved as a child.  Sorry, Noa, sorry.  It had been eleven years since he’d died; the pain didn’t go away, but its sharp edge had dulled and softened like sea glass. 

Sunja  hadn’t  gone  to  Noa’s  funeral.  He  hadn’t  wanted  his  wife  and children to know about her, and she had done enough already. If she hadn’t visited him the way she had, maybe he might still be alive. Hansu had not gone to the funeral, either. Noa would’ve been fifty-six years old. 

In her dream last night, Sunja had been happy that Hansu had come to see her again. They met at the beach near her old home in Yeongdo to talk, and recalling the dream was like watching another person’s life. How was it possible that Isak and Noa were gone but Hansu was still alive? How was this fair? Hansu was living somewhere in Tokyo in a hospital bed under the watchful gaze of round-the-clock nurses and his daughters. She never saw him anymore and had no wish to. In her dreams, he was as vibrant as he had been when she was a girl. It was not Hansu that she missed, or even Isak. 

What she was seeing again in her dreams was her youth, her beginning, and her  wishes—so  this  was  how  she  became  a  woman.  Without  Hansu  and

Isak and Noa, there wouldn’t have been this pilgrimage to this land. Beyond the  dailiness,  there  had  been  moments  of  shimmering  beauty  and  some glory, too, even in this  ajumma’s life. Even if no one knew, it was true. 

There  was  consolation:  The  people  you  loved,  they  were  always  there with you, she had learned. Sometimes, she could be in front of a train kiosk or the window of a bookstore, and she could feel Noa’s small hand when he was  a  boy,  and  she  would  close  her  eyes  and  think  of  his  sweet,  grassy smell and remember that he had always tried his best. At those moments, it was good to be alone to hold on to him. 

She took the taxi from the train station to the cemetery, then walked the many  rows  to  Isak’s  well-maintained  grave.  There  was  no  need  to  clean anything,  but  she  liked  to  wipe  down  the  marble  tombstone  before  she spoke to him. Sunja fell to her knees and cleaned the flat, square tombstone with the towels she’d brought for the purpose. Isak’s name was carved in Japanese  and  Korean.  1907–1944.  The  white  marble  was  clean  now  and warm from the sun. 

He had been such an elegant and beautiful man. Sunja could recall how the  servant  girls  back  home  had  admired  him;  Bokhee  and  Dokhee  had never seen such a handsome man before. Mozasu took after her more and had her plain face, but he had his father’s straight carriage and steady stride. 

“Yobo,”  she  said,  “Mozasu  is  well.  Last  week,  he  called  me,  because Solomon lost his job with that foreign bank, and now he wants to work with his father. Imagine that? I wonder what you’d make of this.” 

The silence encouraged her. 

“I wonder how you are—” She stopped speaking when she saw Uchida-san, the groundskeeper. Sunja was sitting on the ground in her black woolen pants suit. She glanced at her handbag on the ground. It was an expensive designer bag that Etsuko had bought for her seventieth birthday. 

The groundskeeper stopped before her and bowed, and she returned the bow. 

Sunja smiled at the polite young man, who must have been about forty or forty-five.  Uchida-san  looked  younger  than  Mozasu.  How  did  she  look  to him? Her skin was deeply grooved from the years of sun, and her short hair was  bright  white.  No  matter—seventy-three  did  not  feel  very  old  to  her. 

Had  the  groundskeeper  heard  her  mumbling  in  Korean?  Ever  since  she’d stopped working at the confectionery, her limited Japanese had deteriorated

further.  It  was  not  terrible,  but  lately  she  felt  shy  around  native  speakers. 

Uchida-san picked up his rake and walked away. 

Sunja  put  both  hands  on  the  white  marble,  as  if  she  could  touch  Isak from where she was. 

“I wish you could tell me what will happen to us. I wish. I wish I knew that Noa was with you.” 

Several rows from her, the groundskeeper cleared wet leaves from stone markers.  Now  and  then  he  would  glance  up  at  her,  and  Sunja  felt embarrassed to be seen talking to a grave. She wanted to stay a little longer. 

Wanting  to  look  like  she  was  busy,  Sunja  opened  her  canvas  bag  to  put away the dirty towels. In the bottom of her bag, she found her house keys on the key ring with thumbnail-sized photographs of Noa and Mozasu in a sealed acrylic frame. 

Sunja started to weep, and she could not help her crying. 

“Boku-san.” 

“Hai?” Sunja looked up at the groundskeeper. 

“May  I  get  you  something  to  drink?  I  have  a  thermos  of  tea  in  the cottage. It is not very fine tea, but it is warm.” 

“No,  no.  Thank  you.  All  time,  you  see  people  cry,”  she  said  in  broken Japanese. 

“No,  actually,  very  few  people  come  here,  but  your  family  visits regularly. You have two sons and a grandson, Solomon. Mozasu-sama visits every month or two. I haven’t seen Noa-sama in eleven years, but he used to come on the last Thursday of each month. You could set a watch to him. 

How is Noa-sama? He was a very kind man.” 

“Noa come here? Come before 1978?” 

“Hai.” 

“From 1963 to 1978?” She mentioned the years he would have been in Nagano.  She  said  the  dates  again,  hoping  that  her  Japanese  was  correct. 

Sunja pointed to Noa’s photograph on the key ring. “He visit here?” 

The  groundskeeper  nodded  with  conviction  at  the  photograph,  then looked up in the sky like he was trying to see some sort of calendar in his mind. 

“Hai,  hai. He came in those years and before, too. Noa-sama told me to go to school and even offered to send me if I wished.” 

“Really?” 

“Yes, but I told him I have an empty gourd for a head, and that it would have been pointless to send me to school. Besides, I like it here. It’s quiet. 

Everybody who comes to visit is very kind. He asked me never to mention his visits, but I have not seen him in over a decade, and I’d wondered if he moved  away  to  England.  He  told  me  to  read  good  books  and  brought  me translations of the great British author Charles Dickens.” 

“Noa, my son, is dead.” 

The groundskeeper opened his mouth slightly. 

“My son, my son,” Sunja said quietly. 

“I am very sad to hear that, Boku-san. Truly, I am,” the groundskeeper said, looking forlorn. “I’d been hoping to tell him that after I finished all the books he’d brought me, I bought more of my own. I have read through all of  Mr.  Dickens’s  books  in  translations,  but  my  favorite  is  the  first  one  he gave me,  David Copperfield. I admire David.” 

“Noa loved to read. The best. He loved to read.” 

“Have you read Mr. Dickens?” 

“I don’t know how,” she said. “To read.” 

“Maji?  If  you  are  Noa’s  mother,  you  are  very  smart,  too.  Perhaps  you can go to night school for adults. That is what Noa-sama told me to do.” 

Sunja smiled at the groundskeeper, who seemed hopeful about sending an  old  woman  to  school.  She  remembered  Noa  cajoling  Mozasu  to persevere with his studies. 

The  groundskeeper  looked  at  his  rake.  He  bowed  deeply,  then  excused himself to return to his tasks. 

When he was out of sight, Sunja dug a hole at the base of the tombstone about  a  foot  deep  with  her  hands  and  dropped  the  key  ring  photograph inside. She covered the hole with dirt and grass, then did what she could to clean her hands with her handkerchief, but dirt remained beneath her nails. 

Sunja tamped down the earth, then brushed the grass with her fingers. 

She picked up her bags. Kyunghee would be waiting for her at home. 

Acknowledgments

I got the idea for the story in 1989. 

I was a junior in college, and I didn’t know what I’d do after graduation. 

Rather  than  ponder  my  future,  I  sought  distractions.  One  afternoon,  I attended what was then called a Master’s Tea, a guest lecture series at Yale. 

I’d never been to one before. An American missionary based in Japan was giving  a  talk  about  the  “Zainichi,”  a  term  used  often  to  describe  Korean Japanese  people  who  were  either  migrants  from  the  colonial  era  or  their descendants.  Some  Koreans  in  Japan  do  not  wish  to  be  called   Zainichi Korean because the term means literally “foreign resident staying in Japan,” 

which makes no sense since there are often third, fourth, and fifth surviving generations of Koreans in Japan. There are many ethnic Koreans who are now Japanese citizens, although this option to naturalize is not an easy one. 

There are also many who have intermarried with the Japanese or who have partial Korean heritage. Sadly, there is a long and troubled history of legal and social discrimination against the Koreans in Japan and those who have partial ethnic Korean backgrounds. There are some who never disclose their Korean  heritage,  although  their  ethnic  identity  may  be  traced  to  their identification papers and government records. 

The missionary talked about this history and relayed a story of a middle school  boy  who  was  bullied  in  his  yearbook  because  of  his  Korean background.  The  boy  jumped  off  a  building  and  died.  I  would  not  forget this. 

I graduated college in 1990 with a degree in history. I went to law school and practiced law for two years. After quitting the law, I decided to write as early as 1996 about the Koreans in Japan. I wrote many stories and novel drafts, which were never published. I was despondent. Then in 2002,  The Missouri  Review  published  the  story  “Motherland,”  which  is  about  a

Korean  Japanese  boy  who  gets  fingerprinted  and  receives  a  foreigner’s identity  card  on  his  birthday,  and  later  it  won  the  Peden  Prize.  Also,  I’d submitted  a  fictionalized  account  of  the  story  I’d  heard  in  college  and received  a  New  York  Foundation  for  the  Arts  fellowship.  With  that  grant money, I took classes and paid for a babysitter so I could write. This early recognition was critical, because it took me so long to publish anything at all. Moreover, the NYFA fellowship confirmed my stubborn belief that the stories of Koreans in Japan should be told somehow when so much of their lives had been despised, denied, and erased. 

I wanted very much to get this story right; however, I felt that I didn’t have all the knowledge or skills to do this properly. In my anxiety, I did an enormous amount of research and wrote a draft of a novel about the Korean Japanese community. Still, it did not feel right. Then in 2007, my husband got a job offer in Tokyo, and we moved there in August. On the ground, I had the chance to interview dozens of Koreans in Japan and learned that I’d gotten  the  story  wrong.  The  Korean  Japanese  may  have  been  historical victims,  but  when  I  met  them  in  person,  none  of  them  were  as  simple  as that. I was so humbled by the breadth and complexity of the people I met in Japan  that  I  put  aside  my  old  draft  and  started  to  write  the  book  again  in 2008, and I continued to write it and revise it until its publication. 

I have had this story with me for almost thirty years. Consequently, there are many people to thank. 

Speer  Morgan  and  Evelyn  Somers  of   The Missouri Review  believed  in this story first. The NYFA gave me a fiction fellowship when I wanted to give up. Thank you. 

When I lived in Tokyo, a great number of individuals agreed to sit with me and answer my many questions about the Koreans in Japan as well as about  expatriate  life,  international  finance,  the  yakuza,  the  history  of colonial  Christianity,  police  work,  immigration,  Kabukicho,  poker,  Osaka, Tokyo  real  estate  deals,  leadership  in  Wall  Street,  mizu  shobai,  and  of course,  the  pachinko  industry.  When  we  could  not  meet  in  person,  many spoke to me on the phone or answered my questions via e-mail. I am in debt to  the  following  generous  individuals:  Susan  Menadue  Chun,  Jongmoon Chun,  Ji  Soo  Chun,  Haeng-ja  Chung,  Kangja  Chung,  the  Reverend  Yean Won Chung, Scott Callon, Emma Fujibayashi, Stephanie and Greg Guyett, Mary  Hauet,  Danny  Hegglin,  Gen  Hidemori,  Tim  Hornyak,  Linda  Rhee

Kim,  Myeong  Gu  Kim,  Alexander  Kinmont,  Tamie  Matsunaga,  Naoki Miyamoto, Rika Nakajima, Sohee Park, Alberto Tamura, Peter Tasker, Jane and Kevin Quinn, Hyang Yang, Paul Yang, Simon Yoo, and Chongran Yun. 

I have to note here that this book could not have been written without the significant scholarship of the following authors: David Chapman, Haeng-ja Chung, Haruko Taya Cook, Theodore F. Cook, Erin Chung, George De Vos, Yasunori  Fukuoka,  Haeyoung  Han,  Hildi  Kang,  Sangjun  Kang,  Sarah Sakhae  Kashani,  Jackie  J.  Kim,  Changsoo  Lee,  Soo  im  Lee,  John  Lie, Richard  Lloyd  Parry,  Samuel  Perry,  Sonia  Ryang,  Tessa  Morris-Suzuki, Stephen Murphy-Shigematsu, and Mary Kimoto Tomita. Although I relied heavily on their scholarship, any errors of fact are my own. 

I  want  to  thank  my  friends  and  family  in  Japan,  South  Korea,  and  the United  States  for  their  love,  faith,  and  kindness.  Without  them,  it  would have been impossible to write, revise, and rewrite this book: the Reverend Harry  Adams,  Lynn  Ahrens,  Harold  Augenbraum,  Karen  Grigsby  Bates, Dionne  Bennett,  Stephana  Bottom,  Robert  Boynton,  Kitty  Burke,  Janel Anderberg  Callon,  Scott  Callon,  Lauren  Cerand,  Ken  Chen,  Andrea  King Collier, Jay Cosgrove, Elizabeth Cuthrell, Junot Díaz, Charles Duffy, David L.  Eng,  Shelley  Fisher  Fishkin,  Roxanne  Fraser,  Elizabeth  Gillies,  Rosita Grandison,  Lois  Perelson  Gross,  Susan  Guerrero,  Greg  and  Stephanie Guyett,  Shinhee  Han,  Mary  Fish  Hardin,  the  Reverend  Matthew  Hardin, Robin  Marantz  Henig,  Deva  Hirsch,  David  Henry  Hwang,  Mihoko  Iida, Matthew Jacobson, Masa and Michan Kabayama, Henry Kellerman, Robin F. Kelly, Clara Kim, Leslie Kim, Erika Kingetsu, Alex and Reiko Kinmont, Jean Hanff Korelitz, Kate Krader, Lauren Kunkler Tang, the Reverend Kate Latimer,  Wendy  Lamb,  Hali  Lee,  Connie  Mazella,  Christopher  W. 

Mansfield,  Kathy  Matsui,  Jesper  Koll,  Nancy  Miller,  Geraldine  Moriba Meadows,  Tony  and  Suzanne  O’Connor,  Bob  Ouimette,  Asha  Pai-Sethi, Kyoungsoo Paik, Jeff Pine, Cliff and Jennifer Park, Sunny Park, Tim Piper, Sally  Gifford  Piper,  Sharon  Pomerantz,  Gwen  Robinson,  Catherine Salisbury,  Jeannette  Watson  Sanger,  Linda  Roberts  Singh,  Tai  C.  Terry, Henry  Tricks,  Erica  Wagner,  Abigail  Walch,  Nahoko  Wada,  Lindsay Whipp, Kamy Wicoff, Neil and Donna Wilcox, and Hanya Yanagihara. 

My  early  readers  Dionne  Bennett,  Benedict  Cosgrove,  Elizabeth Cuthrell, Junot Díaz, Christopher Duffy, Tom Jenks, Myung J. Lee, Sang J. 

Lee, and Erica Wagner gave me their invaluable time, keen insights, and the

necessary courage to persevere. Thank you. 

In 2006, I met my agent Suzanne Gluck, and I remain deeply grateful for her  friendship,  wisdom,  and  goodness.  I  want  to  thank  Elizabeth Sheinkman,  Cathryn  Summerhayes,  Raffaella  De  Angelis,  and  Alicia Gordon  for  their  brilliant  work  and  generous  faith.  I  am  thankful  to  Clio Seraphim for her thoughtful support. 

Here I declare my profound gratitude to my amazing editor Deb Futter, whose  clear-eyed  vision,  superb  intelligence,  and  exceptional  care  shaped this  book.  Thank  you,  Deb.  My  brilliant  publisher  Jamie  Raab  has supported  my  writing  from  the  very  beginning,  and  I  am  thankful  to  call Jamie my friend. I want to acknowledge the very talented people at Grand Central Publishing and the Hachette Book Group: Matthew Ballast, Andrew Duncan,  Jimmy  Franco,  Elizabeth  Kulhanek,  Brian  McLendon,  Mari Okuda,  Michael  Pietsch,  Jordan  Rubinstein,  Karen  Torres,  and  Anne Twomey. I am very grateful to Chris Murphy, Dave Epstein, Judy DeBerry, Roger Saginario, Lauren Roy, Tom McIntyre, and the excellent salespeople of HBG. Also, many thanks to my fantastic copy editor Rick Ball. As ever, many thanks to the wonderful Andy Dodds, whose passion and excellence inspire me. I thank the exquisite Lauren Cerand. 

Here, I want very much to thank these tremendous individuals at my UK

publishing  house  for  their  faith  and  support:  Neil  Belton,  Madeleine O’Shea, and Suzanna Sangster. Thank you. 

Mom, Dad, Myung, and Sang: thank you for your love. Christopher and Sam:  You  fill  my  life  with  wonder  and  grace.  Thank  you  for  being  my family. 

 MJL

About the Author

Min Jin Lee is the national bestselling author of  Free Food for Millionaires, and  has  received  the  New  York  Foundation  for  the  Arts  fellowship  for Fiction, the Peden Prize for Best Story, and the Narrative Prize for New and Emerging  Writer.  She  has  written  for  the   New  York  Times,  Condé  Nast Traveler,  the  London   Times,  Vogue,  the   Wall  Street  Journal,  and   Food  & Wine, among others. For more information, please visit MinJinLee.com. 

Thank you for buying this ebook, published by Hachette Digital. 

To receive special offers, bonus content, and news about our latest ebooks and apps, sign up for our newsletters. 

Sign Up

Or visit us at hachettebookgroup.com/newsletters

Reading Group Guide

1.    “History  has  failed  us,  but  no  matter.”  How  does  the  opening  line reflect the rest of the book—and do you agree? 

2. In  a  way,  Sunja’s  relationship  with  Isak  progresses  in  reverse,  as  her pregnancy  by  another  man  brings  them  together  and  prompts  Isak  to propose marriage. How does Lee redefine intimacy and love with these two characters? 

3.   “Their  eldest  brother,  Samoel,  had  been  the  brave  one,  the  one  who would’ve  confronted  the  officers  with  audacity  and  grace,  but  Yoseb knew he was no hero.…Yoseb didn’t see the point of anyone dying for his  country  or  for  some  greater  ideal.  He  understood  survival  and family.” What kinds of bravery are shown by different characters, and what motivates this bravery? 

4. Compare Noa’s biological and adoptive fathers, Hansu and Isak: What qualities  does  each  try  to  foster  in  Noa,  and  why?  Whom  does  Noa most resemble? 

5. What does “home” mean to each of the main characters? Does it ever change? In what ways does a yearning for home color the tone of the novel? 

6. How do courting and marriage alter from one generation to the next? 

7. Compare the ways in which the women of this novel—from Sunja to Hana—experience sex. 

8. How much agency and power do you think Sunja really has over her life? 

9. Sunja tells Noa that “Blood doesn’t matter.”  Do you agree? What parts of the novel support or weaken Sunja’s claim? 

10. Yangjin and Kyunghee agree that  “A woman’s lot is to suffer.”  Do you think the women suffer more than the men in this book? If so, in what ways? How does the suffering of Sunja and Kyunghee compare to that of Yoseb? Noa and Mozasu’s? 

11. Much  is  made  of  Sunja’s  fading  beauty,  as  well  as  the  physical appearance of all the women who surround her. What does this reveal about society at this time? Do you see this emphasis on female beauty reflected in present-day culture? 

12. Throughout  the  book,  characters  often  must  choose  between  survival and tradition or morality. Can you think of any examples that embody this tension? 

13. Many  of  the  main  characters  struggle  with  shame  throughout  their lives,  whether  due  to  their  ethnicity,  family,  life  choices,  or  other factors. How does shame drive both their successes and failures? 

14. The terms “good Korean” and “good Japanese” are used many times throughout  the  book.  What  does  it  mean  to  be  a  “good  Korean”?  A

“good Japanese”? 

15.    “Both  men  had  made  money  from  chance  and  fear  and  loneliness.” 

 Pachinko  begins with the family of a humble fisherman that, through the generations—and through times of poverty, violence, and extreme discrimination—gains  wealth  and  success.  What  were  the  ways  in which  the  family  managed  to  not  only  survive,  but  also  eventually thrive? What is the relationship among money, race, power, and class? 

16.    “Wherever  he  went,  the  news  of  his  mother’s  death  preceded  him, wrapping the child in a kind of protective cloud; teachers and mothers

 of his friends were watchful on his behalf.”  In what other ways does death act as a “protective cloud” in this novel? 

17. Compare  the  many  parent-child  relationships  in  the  novel.  How  do they  differ  across  families  and  generations?  What  hopes  and  dreams does  each  parent  hold  for  their  children—and  are  these  hopes rewarded? 

18. Even  in  death  or  physical  absence,  the  presence  of  many  characters lingers  on  throughout  the  book.  How  does  this  affect  your  reading experience?  How  would  the  book  have  been  different  if  it  were confined to one character’s perspective? 

19. Why do you think the author chose  Pachinko for the title? 

A Conversation with Min Jin Lee

What initially inspired you to write this novel? Why did you choose to focus on Korea and Japan during a time of war? 

I learned about the Korean-Japanese people nearly thirty years ago when I was in college. I didn’t know anything about this community, which had its origins during the Japanese colonial occupation of Korea from 1910 to1945. As a history major and as an immigrant, I was curious about the Korean diaspora, resulting from the invasions and destabilization of the once-unified nation. However, what really moved me to write this novel and to rewrite it so many times were the compelling stories of individuals who struggled to face historical catastrophes. Although the history of kings and rulers is unequivocally fascinating, I think that we are also hungry for the narrative history of ordinary people, who lack connections and material resources. The modern Korean is informed by the legacy of the Japanese occupation, World War II, the Cold War, and the Korean War as well as Confucianism, Buddhism, Communism, and Christianity. All these topics are reflected in this book, because they interest me, but I wanted to explore and better understand how common people live through these events and issues. These wars and ideas loom large in our imagination, but on a daily basis, such events and beliefs are illustrated concretely from moment to moment. 

What was the process of writing such a long family saga like? Did you begin with that intention and a map of how the characters’ lives would play out, or did you work it out as you wrote? 

I wrote a draft of this novel between the years 1996 and 2004, and it was called  Motherland; an eponymous excerpt of it was published in  The Missouri Review in 2002. But after I wrote the whole manuscript, I knew there was something wrong with it as a novel draft. 

Consequently,  Motherland became the second novel manuscript I put aside, because it didn’t match the vision I had of the work in my mind. 

I was also working on  Free Food for Millionaires, and although it was my third novel manuscript,  Free Food for Millionaires  became my first published novel in 2007. That same year, I moved to Japan with my family. In Tokyo and Osaka, I interviewed many Korean-Japanese. 

Through that process of gathering oral histories, I felt compelled to discard my earlier draft. In terms of plot, in my initial draft, I had started the book in the late 1970s; after my interviews, I realized that the story had to begin in 1910, and my character Sunja moves from Korea to Japan in 1933. To put it mildly, this was a traumatic realization, because I had to change everything and start again. I wrote a new outline with new characters, and  Motherland became  Pachinko. 

After I got over my initial shock of having to throw away a whole manuscript, I returned to my desk and wrote new chapter outlines. In short, I do work with outlines and maps, but I am in the habit of throwing away my outlines and maps when necessary. I don’t work very efficiently. 

Why did you choose for the narrator’s perspective to switch from character to character, rather than focusing on one person’s experience? 

Both  Free Food for Millionaires and  Pachinko are written in an omniscient point of view. In both works, there is a narrator who knows the viewpoints of each character at all times. In Western literature, omniscient narration was the popular style in the nineteenth century, and it is my favorite point of view for community narratives. In both novels, I wasn’t interested in only one or two main characters. This bias may arise from my personality. I am normally interested in the minor characters as well as the major ones. In realistic fiction and

especially in a book-length work, characters cannot exist alone, and certainly they are never in a vacuum. Naturally, the interplay of characters in setting and time affects both plot and characterization. 

There are major plot lines, but minor plot lines should offer critical support to the story. If history so often fails to represent all of us, it is not because historians are not interested, but because historians often lack the primary documents of so-called minor characters in history. 

Interestingly, women have become at best the minor characters in history—although we represent half the human race—because we have left so few primary documents in nearly all cultures and civilizations. 

Also, poor and middle-class men of all races and cultures—although their lives were so often tragically sacrificed in war and labor—are often minor characters in history, because they too did not leave sufficient written evidence of their lives. I am drawn to novel writing using the omniscient point of view because this allows me to imagine and reveal the minds as well as the behaviors of all characters when necessary. For the kinds of books I want to write, I need an omniscient narrator. That said, I love to read first-person (singular and plural), second-person (singular and plural), and third-person limited (fixed or shifting) points of view. The twenty-first-century author has a lot of choices. 

Did you consciously shift the narrative tone as you switched perspectives? 

I think my narrator’s tone (by “tone,” I mean the attitude the narrator has toward the subject) does not shift much. More than anything, I wanted very much for the tone to be fair. There are remarkable narrators in great works of fiction that are wry ( Pride and Prejudice), sarcastic and unreliable ( Lolita), opinionated and high-minded ( Jane Eyre), humble and curious ( David Copperfield), and intellectual and world-weary ( Middlemarch). “Fair” seems like such a simple word, but I think because my subject matter is so troubling and controversial, I wanted my narrator to be as objective as possible. Above all, I wanted the narrator to be sympathetic to every character’s plight. I will be forty-

eight years old in November 2016, and as I get older, it is easier for me to imagine and appreciate many more perspectives—perspectives I may have disliked when I was much younger. Especially for this book, I wanted my narrator to be fair to each perspective because the Korean-Japanese are so seldom written about in English. I find that in life, even the most unsympathetic person has a clear delineation of his motives, however complex and unappealing, but to him, there is a moral clarity to his actions. I think part of my job as a storyteller is to recognize the congruity or incongruity of his motives and behavior and somehow still be fair to the character and to the reader. I think, especially here, if the narrator is fair, then the reader can decide what happened and what she feels about the story. 

Which authors do you admire? 

I adore nineteenth-century writers Bronte, Eliot, Trollope, Dickens, Flaubert, Tolstoy, and Balzac. I also love Sinclair Lewis, Theodore Dreiser, Sherwood Anderson, William Faulkner, Edith Wharton, Ernest Hemingway, Zora Neale Hurston, Mark Twain, Tanizaki, Henry James, James Baldwin, and Ralph Ellison. As for modern living writers, I very much admire Lynn Ahrens, Lan Samantha Chang, Alexander Chee, Junot Díaz, Robin Marantz Henig, Kazuo Ishiguru, Colson Whitehead, Haruki Murakami, David Henry Hwang, Meg Wolitzer, Maxine Hong Kingston, Hilton Als, Simon Winchester, Chang-rae Lee, David Mitchell, Toni Morrison, Alice Munro, Gary Shteyngart, William Trevor, and Erica Wagner. The writings of Cynthia Ozick, Shelley Fisher Fishkin, Audre Lorde, Vivian Gornick, bell hooks, James Baldwin, and Virginia Woolf continue to encourage me to write more honestly and to dwell on subjects that matter to me. 

In many ways, Sunja’s plight is the catalyst for much of the book’s plot. 

What is your relationship with her character? What inspired her creation? 

From 2007 to 2011, I interviewed many Korean-Japanese men and women, 

and a great many of them mentioned a first-generation matriarch who sacrificed much of her life for the next generation, which ultimately led me to Sunja and her world. To earn money, first-generation Korean women in Japan worked in open markets, raised pigs in their homes, picked and traded rags and scrap metal, manufactured bootleg alcohol, farmed, and sold homemade goods from carts, among other things. 

Back then as well as today, the poorest women sold homemade goods in the open market, because they did not have much capital to invest. 

By selling boiled corn,  tteokbokki, confections, sweet rice cakes, or gimbap in stalls or from carts, market women supported their families. 

Later, I met women peddlers in the open markets in Osaka and Tokyo. 

It is not easy to sell things in an open market, exposed to the elements as well as to be vulnerable to any person who wants to approach you. 

Also, then as well as today, market women often work in societies where women have less legal protections, rights, and significantly less socio-economic power. 

I was born in Seoul and lived there until I was seven, and in my childhood I was keenly aware of the old women who sold snacks in the open markets and on street corners when I went food shopping with my mother. They were also vivid because they wore traditional clothing, in stark contrast to the modern Koreans of Seoul. When I visited South Korea as a college student in the late 1980s and many times later as an adult, I saw these women again in the markets and in the streets, almost unchanged in their expressions except for their clothes and hair. 

Finally, my parents became small business owners when they immigrated to the United States. The daughter of a well-known minister and the headmaster of an orphanage school in Busan, my mother grew up very sheltered in a privileged home. A former music major at Yonsei University, she taught piano in our home when we lived in Seoul. 

When we moved to New York, she worked alongside my father in their cramped, under-heated wholesale jewelry shop in Manhattan, which was robbed and burgled on numerous occasions. She was on her feet most of the day dealing with customers. On weekends and school holidays, my sisters and I took turns working with our parents at the store. In college, I worked part-time selling clothes and shoes in retail

shops. I continue to feel a strong connection with anyone who has worked in sales or in the service industry. 

Is it easy for you to write your characters’ deaths, or do you have a strong sentimental attachment to them? 

My characters are very real to me, and I speculate that this must be true for most writers. Also, as a reader, I am very attached to characters in books. When Lily Bart dies in  The House of Mirth, I wept and wept. 

Years later, I read Elaine Showalter’s brilliant essay “The Death of the Lady (Novelist)” where she posits that Lily’s death represents the death of the “perfect lady” who no longer belongs in an era of

“vulgarity, boorishness, and malice.” Showalter argues cogently that Lily has to die, because her aspiration for the ideals of a perfect lady no longer made sense and that the author Wharton was also shedding an outdated role as a “lady novelist”: “In deciding that a Lily cannot survive, that the lady must die to make way for the modern woman who will work, love and give birth, Wharton was also signaling her own rebirth as the artist.” I mention Showalter’s insightful analysis of a formative work in my reading and writing life because she taught me a larger idea beyond death as a plot element or death as the expiration of a life. It is possible that characters need to die for the author to make her moral point, for the author himself to regenerate by letting go of an ideal identity, or for the world to recognize the necessity of certain ideas and ideals to die. Certain characters die in  Pachinko, and to me, their deaths were both natural to the plot and necessary symbolically. 

To me, the deaths were painfully inevitable; and to be clear, dear reader, each death broke me. 

Much of this novel deals with the pressures of being a first-generation immigrant, or having dual cultural identities. How much of this was informed by your own experiences? What effects do you think war has on individuals and society? 

Consciously or unconsciously, being a first-generation immigrant informs

my point of view and interests. Regardless of one’s identity, all of us live in an information era where we are continually made to feel physically vulnerable to the political instability and violence around the globe in real time. Consequently, most of the developed world has growing factions in each nation, which want to raise the drawbridge and batten down the hatches. Out of fear, many of us want to retreat, and this makes some sense. Fair or no, immigration is considered in the context of economic scarcity, fear of terrorism, wars and geopolitical conflicts, which may be incipient stages of informal proxy wars. Whatever their cause, all such anxieties and conflicts affect individuals and societies and their movement patterns. Naturally, the movement of people changes the culture of the people around them, and the culture of the people around them affects the migrant people. 

As for me, I lived just a few blocks away from the World Trade Center during the September 11, 2001, attacks, and my family and I had to be evacuated for a time. My family and I were residing in Tokyo during the Tohoku Earthquake on March 11, 2011. I have been changed by these events, and these events inform my work and the way I approach crises. 

Unfortunately, every one of us is vulnerable to manmade and natural disasters, small and great. According to the United Nations High Commissioner of Refugees (UNHCR), there are over 65 million refugees in the world, which is about 1 out of every 113 people on earth. When my father was sixteen years old, he lost his family in the Korean War. The war and the memory of being a war refugee was not spoken of often, but these events lingered in the air of my childhood home. I think this kind of trauma is an unspoken legacy for many first-and second-generation immigrants in the United States and elsewhere. 

My father, a teenage war refugee from Wonsan, became a South Korean migrant worker in Busan, then a college-educated businessman in Seoul. He immigrated to the United States and became a small business owner. He is now a naturalized American citizen, a retiree, and a member of the AARP who also enjoys recreational deep-sea fishing. He has lived many lives away from his birthplace. Most immigrants are like this. Many of my friends and their families have

been directly affected by the Holocaust, World War II, the Korean War, the Vietnam War, the collapse of the Soviet Union, and the suffering inflicted by military dictatorships in the Americas and in African nations. Today, all of us live in an era of vast income, educational and information inequality. However, what we also witness each day is how many ordinary people resist the indignities of life and history with grace and conviction by taking care of their families, friends, neighbors, and communities while striving for their individual goals. 

We cannot help but be interested in the stories of people that history pushes aside so thoughtlessly. 

Why did you choose to title your novel  Pachinko? 

Pachinko is a kind of vertical pinball game played by adults in Japan. 

Although gambling is formally illegal there, pachinko bypasses this prohibition by allowing the player to win prizes, called  keihin, which are exchanged outside the premises of the pachinko parlor for cash. 

What is little known outside of Japan is that as of 2015, pachinko generates revenues of about 19 trillion yen, which is about $190 billion U.S. at the current exchange rate, or about twice the export revenues of the Japanese car industry. Yes, this includes Nissan, Toyota, and Honda. The game started out in the early part of the twentieth century in tiny stalls with itinerant operators at local festivals. After World War II, pachinko was played in parlors for prizes like soap or cigarettes, which were exchanged elsewhere for cash. Today, many parlors issue tokens or cards embedded with valuable metals, which are exchanged for cash only a few steps away from the parlor. There are about 12,000

parlors officially registered in Japan, and 11 million Japanese play pachinko regularly, or about one out of every seven Japanese adults. 

Although ethnic Japanese may have started the pachinko business, over its near century presence in Japan, a great number of ethnic Koreans have operated pachinko parlors and have been involved in the  keihin business and the manufacture of the machines. Despite the strict regulatory involvement of the police and government authorities in the past twenty-five-plus years, the Japanese continue to view the

pachinko industry and the people involved with suspicion and hostility. 

I mention all this here because nearly every Korean-Japanese person I met in Japan had some historical connection or social connection with the pachinko business—one of the very few businesses in which Koreans could find employment and have a stake. For example, if I interviewed an American-educated Korean-Japanese person who worked in the finance industry as an executive for a Western investment bank, he may have a relative who worked briefly in a parlor, or an uncle who lost everything in a failed pachinko business. 

Also, nearly every Korean-Japanese I interviewed had some close or distant connection to the  yakiniku (Korean barbecue, or  galbi) business. In short, Korean-Japanese had to participate in small businesses, which were often given outsider or inferior status, because it was not possible to find work elsewhere. For me, the pachinko business and the game itself serve as metaphors for the history of Koreans in Japan—a people caught in seemingly random global conflicts—as they win, lose, and struggle for their place and for their lives. 

Female beauty, and how it can persist or fade with age, is such a recurring observation in your novel. Why? 

One form of power, however fleeting, for anyone, is physical beauty. 

Unfortunately, for women, beauty is often expected in addition to whatever other attributes that may be needed or that may already exist. 

In many societies, females are often privileged or punished proportionately for their beauty or lack thereof. Without entering into a larger discussion of the intersection of beauty and age, as well as the impossible external requirements of physical beauty for women of all ages, I guess, I would like to discuss something more obvious in this work. In  Pachinko, I wanted to reflect how a poor young woman’s unconventional beauty, unknown even to herself, can be magnetic and resilient. In the West, there is a disjuncture between the reification and the excessive valuation of certain aspects of so-called Asian female beauty (Asian skincare products being perceived as superior; the

commodification of Asian hair, which is sold expensively for extensions; or the hypersexualization of Asian women in pornography, which I have discussed in  Free Food for Millionaires) and the utter lack of ratification or acknowledgment of realistic Asian female beauty in mainstream media (the sheer absence of Asian female fashion models of varying appearances, mainstream actresses, or any major roles in film and television). There is even a grosser lack of recognition of Asian male beauty or sexual attractiveness. Scholars like David Eng have argued effectively that there is an established practice of a kind of racial castration of Asian men in Western media and literature. Orientalism, the objectification or erasure of Asian beauty and distortion of Asian sexuality deny Asian humanity. I treat all of these issues in my writings. That said, another cultural travesty is the sheer absence of realistic beauty of working-class women of all races in mainstream media, including novels and stories. In  Pachinko, I am acknowledging the physicality and beauty of working-class immigrant women. 

I grew up in Elmhurst, Queens, and now live in Harlem. All my life, I have been surrounded by all kinds of women who work in menial and middle-class jobs, who lack the resources to join gyms, color their hair, buy cosmetics and skincare, go to dermatologists and plastic surgeons, polish their nails, eliminate unwanted hair, buy expensive clothing, eat less cheap carbohydrates and eat more lean proteins to be slim…the list goes on. Conventional physical beauty takes time, money, and effort, and it is expensive for all women, but it is cruelly so for women without resources. Every study points to the fact that attractive people also earn more money and have higher social status. Needless to say, it is a perpetual loop of economic gender cruelty to require women to pay for their physical upkeep and then to punish them financially for not keeping up when they don’t have the funds. However, the reality is that despite what the media says, there are many women in history and in life who are not conventionally attractive yet who are very appealing. So I wanted to write about the woman that I see on the subway or waiting for the bus in the winter wearing a threadbare coat, or the woman who works as a cashier at an H-Mart—women who are

too heavy or wrinkled or gray-haired or improperly dressed by the standards of television, movies, or fashion magazines and now social media sharing apps which commend filters to alter our already insecure images. I am interested in the physicality of women who live their daily struggles with integrity; their beauty captivates those who know them. 

Do you think you have certain themes that you gravitate toward as a writer? 

My subjects are history, war, economics, class, sex, gender, and religion. I think my themes are forgiveness, loss, desire, aspiration, failure, duty, and faith. 

How did your experience writing  Pachinko differ from your first novel, 

 Free Food for Millionaires? 

I wrote  Free Food for Millionaires exclusively in New York City. I grew up in Queens, went to high school in the Bronx, and my parents had a small wholesale jewelry business on 30th Street and Broadway in Manhattan’s Koreatown. Both my sisters live in Brooklyn, and my parents now live in New Jersey. I went to college in Connecticut. 

Needless to say, I know the tri-state area fairly well. Although I had written a draft of this novel in New York, I wrote the new rough draft almost entirely in Tokyo during the years 2007–2011, and I rewrote the drafts between 2011 and 2015 in New York. In Tokyo, I was researching, interviewing, and writing all the time; I was also profoundly homesick and melancholy in a way I had never been before. I missed my family and my friends deeply, and I felt cut off from everyone back home. I enjoyed living in Tokyo very much, but it was difficult, too. Living in Tokyo, I missed America very much; I yearned for the openness, hospitality, and optimism of Americans. I missed the ease of conversation that Americans can have with strangers. In New York, I am more guarded and private, but in Tokyo, I felt a kind of intense and immediate kinship with my fellow

Americans. The epigram for Book III comes from Benedict Anderson’s  Imagined Communities, where he writes of a “horizontal comradeship” which must be necessarily imagined in a nation. I felt this horizontal comradeship strongly with Americans when I lived abroad. I had lost my birthplace once when I moved from Seoul to New York as a child, and living as an adult expatriate in Japan reminded me again of what my characters who lost their birthplace experienced in  Pachinko. 

On a funny note, one of the things I did to overcome my intense homesickness for America, which allowed me to write the new rough draft of  Pachinko, was to bake all the time. It was curious, because I have always cooked and baked, but never as much as I did in Tokyo. In my four years in Japan, I was baking the  Cook’s Illustrated Chocolate Sour Cream Bundt Cake on a dangerously regular basis. I don’t know why, but to me, that amazing cake tastes like home.

Pachinko
    
    
    
    
  

  

Document Outline

Cover

Title Page

Copyright

Also by Min Jin Lee

Dedication

Book I: Gohyang/Hometown

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

Book II: Motherland

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

Book III: Pachinko

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

Acknowledgments

About the Author

Newsletters

Reading Group Guide